INTRODUCTION
The nucleus of the present book is a medieval compendium of Buddhist
philosophy entitled the Abhidhammattha Sangaha. This work is ascribed
to Acariya Anuruddha, a Buddhist savant about whom so little is known
that even his country of origin and the exact century in which he lived
remain in question. Nevertheless, despite the personal obscurity that
surrounds the author, his little manual has become one of the most
important and influential textbooks of Theravada Buddhism. In nine
short chapters occupying about fifty pages in print, the author provides
a masterly summary of that abstruse body of Buddhist doctrine called
the Abhidhamma. Such is his skill in capturing the essentials of that
system, and in arranging them in a format suitable for easy compre-
hension, that his work has become the standard primer for Abhidhamma
studies throughout the Theravada Buddhist countries of South and
Southeast Asia. In these countries, particularly in Burma where the study
of Abhidhamma is pursued most assiduously, the Abhidhammattha
Sangaha is regarded as the indispensable key to unlock this great
treasure-store of Buddhist wisdom.
The Abhidhamma
At the heart of the Abhidhamma philosophy is the Abhidhamma Pitaka,
one of the divisions of the Pali Canon recognized by Theravada Bud-
dhism as the authoritative recension of the Buddha’s teachings. This
canon was compiled at the three great Buddhist councils held in India
in the early centuries following the Buddha’s demise: the first, at Raja-
gaha, convened three months after the Buddha’s Parinibbana by five
hundred senior monks under the leadership of the Elder Mahakassapa;
the second, at Vesall, a hundred years later; and the third, at Pataliputta,
two hundred years later. The canon that emerged from these councils, 
preserved in the Middle Indian language now called Pali, is known as
the Tipitaka, the three “baskets” or collections of the teachings. The first
collection, the Vinaya Pitaka, is the book of discipline, containing the
rules of conduct for the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis—the monks and nuns—
and the regulations governing the Sangha, the monastic order. The Sutta
Pitaka, the second collection, brings together the Buddha’s discourses
spoken by him on various occasions during his active ministry of forty-
`2
five years. And the third collection is the Abhidhamma Pitaka, the “bas-
ket” of the Buddha’s “higher” or “special” doctrine.
This third great division of the Pali Canon bears a distinctly differ-
ent character from the other two divisions. Whereas the Suttas and Vinaya
serve an obvious practical purpose, namely, to proclaim a clear-cut
message of deliverance and to lay down a method of personal training,
the Abhidhamma Pitaka presents the appearance of an abstract and highly
technical systemization of the doctrine. The collection consists of seven
books: the Dhcimmcisangcini, the Vibhanga, the Dhatukatlia, the Puggala-
pannatti, the Kathavatthu, the Yamaka, and the Patthana. Unlike the
Suttas, these are not records of discourses and discussions occurring in
real-life settings; they are, rather, full-blown treatises in which the prin-
ciples of the doctrine have been methodically organized, minutely de-
fined, and meticulously tabulated and classified. Though they were no
doubt originally composed and transmitted orally and only written down
later, with the rest of the canon in the first century B.C., they exhibit
the qualities of structured thought and rigorous consistency more typi-
cal of written documents.
In the Theravada tradition the Abhidhamma Pitaka is held in the
highest esteem, revered as the crown jewel of the Buddhist scriptures.
As examples of this high regard, in Sri Lanka King Kassapa V (tenth
century A.C.) had the whole Abhidhamma Pitaka inscribed on gold
plates and the first book set in gems, while another king, Vijayabahu
(eleventh century) used to study the Dhammasanganl each morning
before taking up his royal duties and composed a translation of it into
Sinhala. On a cursory reading, however, this veneration given to the
Abhidhamma seems difficult to understand. The texts appear to be merely
a scholastic exercise in manipulating sets of doctrinal terms, ponderous
and tediously repetitive.
The reason the Abhidhamma Pitaka is so deeply revered only be-
comes clear as a result of thorough study and profound reflection, un-
dertaken in the conviction that these ancient books have something
significant to communicate. When one approaches the Abhidhamma
treatises in such a spirit and gains some insight into their wide implica-
tions and organic unity, one will find that they are attempting nothing
less than to articulate a comprehensive vision of the totality of experi-
enced reality, a vision marked by extensiveness of range, systematic
completeness, and analytical precision. From the standpoint of Theravada
orthodoxy the system that they expound is not a figment of speculative
thought, not a mosaic put together out of metaphysical hypotheses, but
a disclosure of the true nature of existence as apprehended by a mind
that has penetrated the totality of things both in depth and in the finest
INTRODUCTION	3
detail. Because it bears this character, the Theravada tradition regards
the Abhidhamma as the most perfect expression possible of the Bud-
dha's unimpeded omniscient knowledge {sabbannuta-nana). It is his
statement of the way things appear to the mind of a Fully Enlightened
One, ordered in accordance with the two poles of his teaching: suffer-
ing and the cessation of suffering.
The system that the Abhidhamma Pitaka articulates is simultaneously
a philosophy, a psychology, and an ethics, all integrated into the
framework of a program for liberation. The Abhidhamma may be de-
scribed as a philosophy because it proposes an ontology, a perspective
on the nature of the real. This perspective has been designated the
“dhamma theory” (dhcimmavada). Briefly, the dhamma theory maintains
that ultimate reality consists of a multiplicity of elementary constituents
called dhcimmas. The dhammas are not noumena hidden behind phenom-
ena, not “things in themselves” as opposed to “mere appearances,” but
the fundamental components of actuality. The dhammas fall into two
broad classes: the unconditioned dhamma, which is solely Nibbana,
and the conditioned dhammas, which are the momentary mental and
material phenomena that constitute the process of experience. The
familiar world of substantial objects and enduring persons is, according
to the dhamma theory, a conceptual construct fashioned by the mind
out of the raw data provided by the dhammas. The entities of our every-
day frame of reference possess merely a consensual reality derivative
upon the foundational stratum of the dhammas. It is the dhammas alone
that possess ultimate reality: determinate existence “from their own side”
(sarupato) independent of the mind’s conceptual processing of the data.
Such a conception of the nature of the real seems to be already im-
plicit in the Sutta Pitaka, particularly in the Buddha’s disquisitions on
the aggregates, sense bases, elements, dependent arising, etc., but it
remains there tacitly in the background as the underpinning to the more
pragmatically formulated teachings of the Suttas. Even in the Abhi-
dhamma Pitaka itself the dhamma theory is not yet expressed as an
explicit philosophical tenet; this comes only later, in the Commentar-
ies. Nevertheless, though as yet implicit, the theory still comes into
focus in its role as the regulating principle behind the Abhidhamma^
more evident task, the project of systemization.
This project starts from the premise that to attain the wisdom that
knows things “as they really are,” a sharp wedge must be driven be-
tween those types of entities that possess ontological ultimacy, that is, 
the dhammas, and those types of entities that exist only as conceptual
constructs but are mistakenly grasped as ultimately real. Proceeding
from this distinction, the Abhidhamma posits a fixed number of dhammas
`4
as the building blocks ot actuality, most ot which are drawn trom the
Suttas. It then sets out to define all the doctrinal terms used in the
Suttas in ways that reveal their identity with the ontological ultimates
recognized by the system. On the basis of these definitions, it exhaus-
tively classifies the dhammas into a net of pre-determined categories
and modes of relatedness which highlight their place within the sys-
tem's structure. And since the system is held to be a true reflection of
actuality, this means that the classification pinpoints the place of each
dhamma within the overall structure of actuality.
The Abhidhamma, s attempt to comprehend the nature of reality,
contrary to that of classical science in the West, does not proceed
from the standpoint of a neutral observer looking outwards towards
the external world. The primary concern of the Abhidhamma is to
understand the nature of experience, and thus the reality on which it
focuses is conscious reality, the world as given in experience,
comprising both knowledge and the known in the widest sense. For
this reason the philosophical enterprise of the Abhidhamma shades off
into a phenomenological psychology. To facilitate the understanding
of experienced reality, the Abhidhamma embarks upon an elaborate
analysis of the mind as it presents itself to introspective meditation. It
classifies consciousness into a variety of types, specifies the factors
and functions of each type, correlates them with their objects and phys-
iological bases, and shows how the different types of consciousness
link up with each other and with material phenomena to constitute the
ongoing process of experience.
This analysis of mind is not motivated by theoretical curiosity but
by the overriding practical aim of the Buddha's teaching, the attain-
ment of deliverance from suffering. Since the Buddha traces suffering
to our tainted attitudes —a mental orientation rooted in greed, hatred,
and delusion—the Abhidhamma, s phenomenological psychology also
takes on the character of a psychological ethics, understanding the term
“ethics” not in the narrow sense of a code of morality but as a complete
guide to noble living and mental purification. Accordingly we find that
the Abhidhamma distinguishes states of mind principally on the basis
of ethical criteria: the wholesome and the unwholesome, the beautiful
factors and the defilements. Its schematization of consciousness fol-
lows a hierarchical plan that corresponds to the successive stages of purity
to which the Buddhist disciple attains by practice of the Buddha’s path.
This plan traces the refinement of the mind through the progression of
meditative absorptions, the fine-material-sphere and immaterial-sphere
jhanas, then through the stages of insight and the wisdom of the
supramundane paths and fruits. Finally, it shows the whole scale of
`5
ethical development to culminate in the pertection ot purity attained
with the mind’s irreversible emancipation from all defilements.
All three dimensions of the Abhidhamma—the philosophical, the
psychological, and the ethical—derive their final justification from the
cornerstone of the Buddha’s teaching, the program of liberation an-
nounced by the Four Noble Truths. The ontological survey of dhammas
stems from the Buddha’s injunction that the noble truth of suffering, 
identified with the world of conditioned phenomena as a whole, must
be fully understood {parinheyyd). The prominence of mental defile-
ments and requisites of enlightenment in its schemes of categories, indic-
ative of its psychological and ethical concerns, connects the Abhidhamma
to the second and fourth noble truths, the origin of suffering and the
way leading to its end. And the entire taxonomy of dhammas elabo-
rated by the system reaches its consummation in the “unconditioned
element” (asankhata dhatu), which is Nibbana, the third noble truth,
that of the cessation of suffering.
The Twofold Method
The great Buddhist commentator, Acariya Buddhaghosa, explains the
word “Abhidhamma” as meaning “that which exceeds and is distin-
guished from the Dhamma” {dhammatireka-dhammavisesa), the prefix
abhi having the sense of preponderance and distinction, and dhamma
here signifying the teaching of the Sutta Pitaka.1 When the Abhidhamma
is said to surpass the teaching of the Suttas, this is not intended to
suggest that the Suttanta teaching is defective in any degree or that the
Abhidhamma proclaims some new revelation of esoteric doctrine un-
known to the Suttas. Both the Suttas and the Abhidhamma are grounded
upon the Buddha’s unique doctrine of the Four Noble Truths, and all
the principles essential to the attainment of enlightenment are already
expounded in the Sutta Pitaka. The difference between the two in no
way concerns fundamentals but is, rather, partly a matter of scope and
partly a matter of method.
As to scope, the Abhidhamma offers a thoroughness and complete-
ness of treatment that cannot be found in the Sutta Pitaka. Acariya
Buddhaghosa explains that in the Suttas such doctrinal categories as
the five aggregates, the twelve sense bases, the eighteen elements, and
so forth, are classified only partly, while in the Abhidhamma Pitaka
they are classified fully according to different schemes of classifica-
tion, some common to the Suttas, others unique to the Abhidhamma.2
Thus the Abhidhamma has a scope and an intricacy of detail that set it
apart from the Sutta Pitaka.
`6
The other major area of difference concerns method. The discourses
contained in the Sutta Pitaka were expounded by the Buddha under
diverse circumstances to listeners with very different capacities for com-
prehension. They are primarily pedagogical in intent, set forth in the
way that will be most effective in guiding the listener in the practice of
the teaching and in arriving at a penetration of its truth. To achieve this
end the Buddha freely employs the didactic means required to make the
doctrine intelligible to his listeners. He uses simile and metaphor; he
exhorts, advises, and inspires; he sizes up the inclinations and aptitudes
of his audience and adjusts the presentation of the teaching so that it
will awaken a positive response. For this reason the Suttanta method of
teaching is described as pariyaya-dhammadesana, the figurative or
embellished discourse on the Dhamma.
In contrast to the Suttas, the Abhidhamma Pitaka is intended to
divulge as starkly and directly as possible the totalistic system that under-
lies the Suttanta expositions and upon which the individual discourses
draw. The Abhidhamma takes no account of the personal inclinations
and cognitive capacities of the listeners; it makes no concessions to
particular pragmatic requirements. It reveals the architectonics of actu-
ality in an abstract, formalistic manner utterly devoid of literary embel-
lishments and nedaeoeical exnedients. Thus the Abhidhamma method
is described as the nippariyaya-dhammadesana, the literal or unembel-
ished discourse on the Dhamma.
This difference in technique between the two methods also influences
their respective terminologies. In the Suttas the Buddha regularly makes
use of conventional language (vohciravacana) and accepts conventional
truth (sammutisacca), truth expressed in terms of entities that do not
possess ontological ultimacy but can still be legitimately referred to
them. Thus in the Suttas the Buddha speaks of “I” and “you,” of “man”
and “woman, ” of living beings, persons, and even self as though they
were concrete realities. The Abhidhamma method of exposition, how-
ever, rigorously restricts itself to terms that are valid from the standpoint
of ultimate truth {paramatthasacca): dhammas, their characteristics, their
functions, and their relations. Thus in the Abhidhamma all such concep-
tual entities provisionally accepted in the Suttas for purposes of
meaningful communication are resolved into their ontological ultimates,
into bare mental and material phenomena that are impermanent, condi-
tioned, and dependently arisen, empty of any abiding self or substance.
But a qualification is necessary. When a distinction is drawn be-
tween the two methods, this should be understood to be based on what
is most characteristic of each Pitaka and should not be interpreted as
an absolute dichotomy. To some degree the two methods overlap and
`7
interpenetrate. Thus in the Sutta Pitaka we find discourses that employ
the strictly philosophical terminology of aggregates, sense bases, ele-
ments, etc., and thus come within the bounds of the Abhidhamma
method. Again, within the Abhidhamma Pitaka we find sections, even
a whole book (the Puggalapannatti), that depart from the rigorous man-
ner of expression and employ conventional terminology, thus coming
within the range of the Suttanta method.
Distinctive Features of the Abhidhamma
Apart from its strict adherence to the philosophical method of exposition,
the Abhidhamma makes a number of other noteworthy contributions
integral to its task of systemization. One is the employment, in the
main books of the Abhidhamma Pitaka, of a matika—a matrix or
schedule of categories—as the blueprint for the entire edifice. This
matrix, which comes at the very beginning of the Dhammasanganl as a
preface to the Abhidhamma Pitaka proper, consists of 122 modes of
classification special to the Abhidhamma method. Of these, twenty-two
are triads (tika), sets of three terms into which the fundamental dhammas
are to be distributed; the remaining hundred are dyads (duka), sets of
two terms used as a basis for classification.3 The matrix serves as a
kind of grid for sorting out the complex manifold of experience in
accordance with principles determined by the purposes of the Dhamma.
For example, the triads include such sets as states that are wholesome,
unwholesome, indeterminate; states associated with pleasant feeling,
painful feeling, neutral feeling; states that are kamma results, productive
of kamma results, neither; and so forth. The dyads include such sets as
states that are roots, not roots; states concomitant with roots, not so
concomitant; states that are conditioned, unconditioned; states that are
mundane, supramundane; and so forth. By means of its selection of
categories, the matrix embraces the totality of phenomena, illuminating
it from a variety of angles philosophical, psychological, and ethical in
nature.
A second distinguishing feature of the Abhidhamma is the dissec-
tion of the apparently continuous stream of consciousness into a suc-
cession of discrete evanescent cognitive events called cittas, each a com-
plex unity involving consciousness itself, as the basic awareness of an
object, and a constellation of mental factors (cetasika) exercising more
specialized tasks in the act of cognition. Such a view of consciousness, 
at least in outline, can readily be derived from the Sutta Pitaka's analy-
sis of experience into the five aggregates, among which the four mental
agsreeates are always inseparably conjoined, but the conception remains
`8
there merely suggestive. In the Abhidhamma Pitaka the suggestion is
not simply picked up, but is expanded into an extraordinarily detailed
and coherent picture of the functioning of consciousness both in its
microscopic immediacy and in its extended continuity from life to life.
A third contribution arises from the urge to establish order among
the welter of technical terms making up the currency of Buddhist dis-
course. In defining each of the dhammas, the Abhidhamma texts col-
late long lists of synonyms drawn mostly from the Suttas. This method
of definition shows how a single dhamma may enter under different
names into different sets of categories. For example, among the defile-
ments, the mental factor of greed (lobha) may be found as the taint of
sensual desire, the taint of (attachment to) existence, the bodily knot of
covetousness, clinging to sensual pleasures, the hindrance of sensual
desire, etc.; among the requisites of enlightenment, the mental factor of
wisdom (pannci) may be found as the faculty and power of wisdom, the
enlightenment factor of investigation of states, the path factor of right
view, etc. In establishing these correspondences, the Abhidhamma helps
to exhibit the interconnections between doctrinal terms that might not
be apparent from the Suttas themselves. In the process it also provides
a precision-made tool for interpreting the Buddha’s discourses.
The Abhidhamma conception of consciousness further results in a
new primary scheme for classifying the ultimate constituents of exist-
ence, a scheme which eventually, in the later Abhidhamma literature,
takes precedence over the schemes inherited from the Suttas such as
the aggregates, sense bases, and elements. In the Abhidhamma Pitaka
the latter categories still loom large, but the view of mind as consisting
of momentary concurrences of consciousness and its concomitants leads
to a fourfold method of classification more congenial to the system.
This is the division of actuality into the four ultimate realities
(paramattha): consciousness, mental factors, material phenomena, and
Nibbana (citta, cetasika, rupa, nibbana), the first three comprising con-
ditioned reality and the last the unconditioned element.
The last novel feature of the Abhidhamma method to be noted here —
contributed by the final book of the Pitaka, the Patthana—is a set of
twenty-four conditional relations laid down for the purpose of showing
how the ultimate realities are welded into orderly processes. This scheme
of conditions supplies the necessary complement to the analytical ap-
proach that dominates the earlier books of the Abhidhamma. The method
of analysis proceeds by dissecting apparent wholes into their compo-
nent parts, thereby exposing their voidness of any indivisible core that
might qualify as self or substance. The synthetic method plots the con-
ditional relations of the bare phenomena obtained by analysis to show
`9
that they are not isolated self-contained units but nodes in a vast multi-
layered web of inter-related, inter-dependent events. Taken in conjunc-
tion, the analytical method of the earlier treatises of the Abhidhamma
Pitaka and the synthetic method of the Patthana establish the essential
unity of the twin philosophical principles of Buddhism, non-self or ego-
lessness (anatta) and dependent arising or conditionality (paticca
samuppada). Thus the foundation of the Abhidhamma methodology
remains in perfect harmony with the insights that lie at the heart of the
entire Dhamma.
The Origins of the Abhidhamma
Although modern critical scholarship attempts to explain the formation
of the Abhidhamma by a gradual evolutionary process,4 Theravada
orthodoxy assigns its genesis to the Buddha himself. According to the
Great Commentary (maha-atthakatha) quoted by Acariya Buddhaghosa,
“What is known as Abhidhamma is not the province nor the sphere of a
disciple; it is the province, the sphere of the Buddhas., , 5 The commen-
tarial tradition holds, moreover, that it was not merely the spirit of the
Abhidhamma, but the letter as well, that was already realized and ex-
pounded by the Buddha during his lifetime.
The Atthasalinl relates that in the fourth week after the Enlighten-
ment, while the Blessed One was still dwelling in the vicinity of the
Bodhi Tree, he sat in a jewel house (rata nag ha ra) in the northwest
direction. This jewel house was not literally a house made of precious
stones, but was the place where he contemplated the seven books of the
Abhidhamma Pitaka. He contemplated their contents in turn, beginning
with the Dhammasanganz, but while investigating the first six books
his body did not emit rays. However, upon coming to the Patthana,
when “he began to contemplate the twenty-four universal conditional
relations of root, object, and so on, his omniscience certainly found its
opportunity therein. For as the great fish Timiratipingala finds room
only in the great ocean 84,000 yojanas in depth, so his omniscience
truly finds room only in the Great Book. Rays of six colours —indigo,
golden, red, white, tawny, and dazzling—issued from the Teacher’s
body, as he was contemplating the subtle and abstruse Dhamma by his
omniscience which had found such opportunity.”6
Theravada orthodoxy thus maintains that the Abhidhamma Pitaka is
authentic Word of the Buddha, in this respect differing from an early
rival school, the Sarvastivadins. This school also had an Abhidhamma
Pitaka consisting of seven books, considerably different in detail from
the Theravada treatises. According to the Sarvastivadins, the books of
`10
the Abhidhamma Fitaka were composed by Buddhist disciples, several
being attributed to authors who appeared generations after the Buddha.
The Theravada school, however, holds that the Blessed One himself
expounded the books of the Abhidhamma, except for the detailed refu-
tation of deviant views in the Kathavatthu, which was the work of the
Elder Moggaliputta Tissa during the reign of Emperor Asoka.
The Pali Commentaries, apparently drawing upon an old oral tradi-
tion, maintain that the Buddha expounded the Abhidhamma, not in the
human world to his human disciples, but to the assembly of devas or
gods in the Tavatimsa heaven. According to this tradition, just prior to
his seventh annual rains retreat the Blessed One ascended to the
Tavatimsa heaven and there, seated on the Pandukambala stone at the
foot of the Paricchattaka tree, for the three months of the rains he taught
the Abhidhamma to the devas who had assembled from the ten thou-
sand world-systems. He made the chief recipient of the teaching his
mother, Mahamaya-devT, who had been reborn as a deva. The reason
the Buddha taught the Abhidhamma in the deva world rather than in
the human realm, it is said, is because in order to give a complete
picture of the Abhidhamma it has to be expounded from the beginning
to the end to the same audience in a single session. Since the full expo-
sition of the Abhidhamma requires three months, only devas and Brahmas
could receive it in unbroken continuity, for they alone are capable of
remaining in one posture for such a length of time.
However, each day, to sustain his body, the Buddha would descend
to the human world to go on almsround in the northern region of
Uttarakuru. After collecting almsfood he went to the shore of Anotatta
Lake to partake of his meal. The Elder Sariputta, the General of the
Dhamma, would meet the Buddha there and receive a synopsis of the
teaching given that day in the deva world: “Then to him the Teacher
gave the method, saying, ‘Sariputta, so much doctrine has been shown., 
Thus the giving of the method was to the chief disciple, who was en-
dowed with analytical knowledge, as though the Buddha stood on the
edge of the shore and pointed out the ocean with his open hand. To the
Elder also the doctrine taught by the Blessed One in hundreds and thou-
sands of methods became very clear.”7
Having learnt the Dhamma taught him by the Blessed One, Sariputta
in turn taught it to his own circle of 500 pupils, and thus the textual
recension of the Abhidhamma Pitaka was established. To the Vener-
able Sariputta is ascribed the textual order of the Abhidhamma treatises
as well as the numerical series in the Patthana. Perhaps we should see
in these admissions of the Atthasalinl an implicit acknowledgement that
while the philosophical vision of the Abhidhamma and its basic archi-
`11
tecture originate from the Buddha, the actual working out of the de-
tails, and perhaps even the prototypes of the texts themselves, are to be
ascribed to the illustrious Chief Disciple and his entourage of students.
In other early Buddhist schools, too, the Abhidhamma is closely con-
nected with the Venerable Sariputta, who in some traditions is regarded
as the literal author of Abhidhamma treatises.8
The Seven Books
A brief outline of the contents of the seven canonical Abhidhamma
books will provide some insight into the plethora of textual material to
be condensed and summarized by the Abhidhammattha Sangaha. The
first book, the Dhammasanganl, is the fountainhead of the entire sys-
tem. The title may be translated “Enumeration of Phenomena, , ’ and the
work does in fact undertake to compile an exhaustive catalogue of the
ultimate constituents of existence.
Opening with the mcitika, the schedule of categories which serves as
the framework for the whole Abhidhamma, the text proper is divided
into four chapters. The first, “States of Consciousness, ” takes up about
half of the book and unfolds as an analysis of the first triad in the
matika, that of the wholesome, the unwholesome, and the indetermi-
nate. To supply that analysis, the text enumerates 121 types of con-
sciousness classified by way of their ethical quality.9 Each type of con-
sciousness is in turn dissected into its concomitant mental factors, which
are individually defined in full. The second chapter, “On Matter, ” con-
tinues the inquiry into the ethically indeterminate by enumerating and
classifying the different types of material phenomena. The third chap-
ter, called “The Summary, , ’ offers concise explanations of all the terms
in the Abhidhamma matrix and the Suttanta matrix as well. Finally, a
concluding “Synopsis” provides a more condensed explanation of the
Abhidhamma matrix but omits the Suttanta matrix.
The Vibhanga, the “Book of Analysis, , ’ consists of eighteen chap-
ters, each a self-contained dissertation, dealing in turn with the following:
aggregates, sense bases, elements, truths, faculties, dependent arising, foun-
dations of mindfulness, supreme efforts, means to accomplishment, fac-
tors of enlightenment, the eightfold path, jhanas, illimitables, training rules,
analytical knowledges, kinds of knowledge, minor points (a numerical
inventoiy of defilements), and ‘the heart of the doctrine” {dhammahadaya},
a psycho-cosmic topography of the Buddhist universe. Most of the chap-
ters in the Vibhanga, though not all, involve three sub-sections: an analy-
sis according to the methodology of the Suttas; an analysis according
to the methodology of the Abhidhamma proper; and an interrogation
`12
section, which applies the categories of the matrix to the subject under
investigation.
The Dhcitukatha, the “Discourse on Elements, ” is written entirely in
catechism form. It discusses all phenomena with reference to the three
schemata of aggregates, sense bases, and elements, seeking to determine
whether, and to what extent, they are included or not included in them,
and whether they are associated with them or dissociated from them.
The Puggalapannatti, “Concepts of Individuals,” is the one book of
the Abhidhamma Pitaka that is more akin to the method of the Suttas
than to the Abhidhamma proper. The work begins with a general enu-
meration of types of concepts, and this suggests that it was originally
intended as a supplement to the other books in order to take account of
the conceptual realities excluded by the strict application of the
Abhidhamma method. The bulk of the work provides formal defini-
tions of different types of individuals. It has ten chapters: the first deals
with single types of individuals; the second with pairs; the third with
groups of three, etc.
The Kathavatthu, “Points of Controversy,” is a polemical treatise
ascribed to the Elder Moggaliputta Tissa. He is said to have compiled it
during the time of Emperor Asoka, 218 years after the Buddha’s Pari-
nibbana, in order to refute the heterodox opinions of the Buddhist schools
outside the Theravadin fold. The Commentaries defend its inclusion in
the Canon by holding that the Buddha himself, foreseeing the errors
that would arise, laid down the outline of rebuttal, which Moggaliputta
Tissa merely filled in according to the Master’s intention.
The Yamaka, the “Book of Pairs,” has the purpose of resolving am-
biguities and defining the precise usage of technical terms. It is so called
owing to its method of treatment, which throughout employs the dual
grouping of a question and its converse formulation. For instance, the
first pair of questions in the first chapter runs thus: “Are all wholesome
phenomena wholesome roots? And are all wholesome roots wholesome
phenomena?, , The book contains ten chapters: roots, aggregates, sense
bases, elements, truths, formations, latent dispositions, consciousness,
phenomena, and faculties.
The Patthana, the “Book of Conditional Relations,” is probably the
most important work of the Abhidhamma Pitaka and thus is traditionally
designated the “Great Treatise” (mahapakarana). Gigantic in extent as
well as in substance, the book comprises five volumes totalling 2500
pages in the Burmese-script Sixth Council edition. The purpose of the
Patthana is to apply its scheme of twenty-four conditional relations to
all the phenomena incorporated in the Abhidhamma matrix. The main
body of the work has four great divisions: origination according to the
`13
positive method, according to the negative method, according to the
positive-negative method, and according to the negative-positive method.
Each of these in turn has six sub-divisions: origination of triads, of dyads,
of dyads and triads combined, of triads and dyads combined, of triads
and triads combined, and of dyads and dyads combined. Within this
pattern of twenty-four sections, the twenty-four modes of conditionality
are applied in due order to all the phenomena of existence in all their
conceivable permutations. Despite its dry and tabular format, even from
a “profane” humanistic viewpoint the Patthana can easily qualify as one
of the truly monumental products of the human mind, astounding in its
breadth of vision, its rigorous consistency, and its painstaking attention
to detail. To Theravada orthodoxy, it is the most eloquent testimony to
the Buddha’s unimpeded knowledge of omniscience.
The Commentaries
The books of the Abhidhamma Pitaka have inspired a voluminous mass
of exegetical literature composed in order to fill out, by way of expla-
nation and exemplification, the scaffoldings erected by the canonical
texts. The most important works of this class are the authorized com-
mentaries of Acariya Buddhaghosa. These are three in number: the
Atthasalinl, “The Expositor, ” the commentary to the Dhammasanganl;
the Sammohavinodanl, “The Dispeller of Delusion,” the commentary
1IIV	rrrr	. i i iv i,i, pviivi ' ,i i 八	mv v ' ” 1111 iv 11又 cti v
to the Vibhanga; and the Paiicappakarana Atthakatha, the combined
commentary to the other five treatises. To this same stratum of litera-
ture also belongs the Visuddhimagga, “The Path of Purification, ” also
composed by Buddhaghosa. Although this last work is primarily an
encyclopaedic guide to meditation, its chapters on “the soil of under-
standing^ (XIV-XVII) lay out the theory to be mastered prior to devel-
oping insight and thus constitute in effect a compact dissertation on
Abhidhamma. Each of the commentaries in turn has its subcommentary
(mUlatlka), by an elder of Sri Lanka named Acariya Ananda, and these
in turn each have a sub-subcommentary (anutlka), by Ananda, s pupil
Dhammapala (who is to be distinguished from the great Acariya
Dhammapala, author of the tikas to Buddhaghosa, s works).
When the authorship of the Commentaries is ascribed to Acariya
Buddhaghosa, it should not be supposed that they are in any way original
compositions, or even original attempts to interpret traditional mate-
rial. They are, rather, carefully edited versions of the vast body of
accumulated exegetical material that Buddhaghosa found at the
Mahavihara in Anuradhapura. This material must have preceded the
great commentator by centuries, representing the collective efforts of
`14
generations of erudite Buddhist teachers to elucidate the meaning of
the canonical Abhidhamma. While it is tempting to try to discern evi-
dence of historical development in the Commentaries over and beyond
the ideas embedded in the Abhidhamma Pitaka, it is risky to push this
line too far, for a great deal of the canonical Abhidhamma seems to
require the Commentaries to contribute the unifying context in which
the individual elements hang together as parts of a systematic whole
and without which they lose important dimensions of meaning. It is
thus not unreasonable to assume that a substantial portion of the
commentarial apparatus originated in close proximity to the canonical
Abhidhamma and was transmitted concurrently with the latter, though
lacking the stamp of finality it was open to modification and amplifica-
tion in a way that the canonical texts were not.
Bearing this in mind, we might briefly note a few of the Abhi-
dhammic conceptions that are characteristic of the Commentaries but
either unknown or recessive in the Abhidhamma Pitaka itself. One is
the detailed account of the cognitive process (cittavithi). While this
conception seems to be tacitly recognized in the canonical books, it
now comes to be drawn out for use as an explanatory tool in its own
right. The functions of the cittas, the different types of consciousness,
are specified, and in time the cittas themselves come to be designated
by way of their functions. The term khana, “moment, ” replaces the
canonical samaya, “occasion, ” as the basic unit for delimiting the occur-
rence of events, and the duration of a material phenomenon is deter-
mined to be seventeen moments of mental phenomena. The division
of a moment into three sub-moments —arising, presence, and dissolu-
tion—also seems to be new to the Commentaries.10 The organization
of material phenomena into groups (kalapa), though implied by the
distinction between the primary elements of matter and derived mat-
ter, is first spelled out in the Commentaries, as is the specification of
the heart-base (hadayavatthu) as the material basis for mind element
and mind-consciousness element.
The Commentaries introduce many (though not all) of the catego-
ries for classifying kamma, and work out the detailed correlations be-
tween kamma and its results. They also close off the total number of
mental factors (cetasika). The phrase in the Dhammasangan/ , “or what-
ever other (unmentioned) conditionally arisen immaterial phenomena
there are on that occasion, ” apparently envisages an open-ended uni-
verse of mental factors, which the Commentaries delimit by specifying
the “or-whatever states” {yevapanakci dhamma). Again, the Commen-
taries consummate the dhamma theory by supplying the formal defini-
tion of dhammas as “things which bear their own intrinsic nature” (attano
`15
sabhavam dharenti ti dhamma). The task of defining specific dhammas
is finally rounded off by the extensive employment of the fourfold
defining device of characteristic, function, manifestation, and proxi-
mate cause, a device derived from a pair of old exegetical texts, the
Petakopadesa and the Nettipakarana.
The Abhidhammattha Sangaha
As the Abhidhamma system, already massive in its canonical version,
grew in volume and complexity, it must have become increasingly un-
wieldy for purposes of study and comprehension. Thus at a certain stage
in the evolution of Theravada Buddhist thought the need must have
become felt for concise summaries of the Abhidhamma as a whole in
order to provide the novice student of the subject with a clear picture of
its main outlines—faithfully and thoroughly, yet without an unmanage-
able mass of detail.
To meet this need there began to appear, perhaps as early as the fifth
century and continuing well through the twelfth, short manuals or com-
pendia of the Abhidhamma. In Burma these are called let-than or “lit-
tle-finger manuals,” of which there are nine:
1.	Abhidhammattha Sangaha, by Acariya Anuruddha;
2.	Namarupa-pariccheda, by the same;
3.	Paramattha-vinicchaya, by the same (?);
4.	Abhidlmmmavatara, by Acariya Buddhadatta (a senior contem-
porary of Buddhaghosa);
5.	Ruparupa-vibhaga, by the same;
6.	Sacca-sankhepa, by Bhadanta Dhammapala (probably Sri Lankan;
different from the great subcommentator);
7.	Moha-vicchedanJ, by Bhadanta Kassapa (South Indian or Sri
Lankan);
8.	Khema-pcikarana, by Bhadanta Khema (Sri Lankan);
9.	Namacara-dlpaka, by Bhadanta Saddhamma Jotipala (Burrnan).
Among these, the work that has dominated Abhidhamma studies from
about the twelfth century to the present day is the first mentioned, the
Abhidhammattha Sangaha, “The Compendium of Things contained in
the Abhidhamma.” Its popularity may be accounted for by its remark-
able balance between concision and comprehensiveness. Within its short
scope all the essentials of the Abhidhamma are briefly and carefully
summarized. Although the book’s manner of treatment is extremely
terse even to the point of obscurity when read alone, when studied
under a qualified teacher or with the aid of an explanatory guide, it
`16
leads tne student confidently tnrougn tne winding maze or tne system
to a clear perception of its entire structure. For this reason throughout
the Theravada Buddhist world the Abhidhammattha Sangaha is always
used as the first textbook in Abhidhamma studies. In Buddhist monas-
teries, especially in Burma, novices and young bhikkhus are required to
learn the Sangaha by heart before they are permitted to study the books
of the Abhidhamma Pitaka and its Commentaries.
Detailed information about the author of the manual, Acariya
Anuruddha, is virtually non-existent. He is regarded as the author of
two other manuals, cited above, and it is believed in Buddhist countries
that he wrote altogether nine compendia, of which only these three
have survived. The Paramattha-vinicchaya is written in an elegant style
of Pali and attains a high standard of literary excellence. According to
the colophon, its author was born in Kaveri in the state of Kancipura
(Conjeevaram) in South India. Acariya Buddhadatta and Acariya
Buddhaghosa are also said to have resided in the same area, and the
subcommentator Acariya Dhammapala was probably a native of the
region. There is evidence that for several centuries Kancipura had been
an important centre of Theravada Buddhism from which learned bhikkhus
went to Sri Lanka for further study.
It is not known exactly when Acariya Anuruddha lived and wrote
his manuals. An old monastic tradition regards him as having been a
fellow student of Acariya Buddhadatta under the same teacher, which
would place him in the fifth century. According to this tradition, the
two elders wrote their respective books, the Abhidhammattha Sangaha
and the Abhidhammavatara, as gifts of gratitude to their teacher, who
remarked: “Buddhadatta has filled a room with all kinds of treasure
and locked the door, while Anuruddha has also filled a room with treasure
but left the door open.” 11 Modern scholars, however, do not endorse
this tradition, maintaining on the basis of the style and content of
Anuruddha, s work that he could not have lived earlier than the eighth
century, more probably between the tenth and early twelfth centuries.12
In the colophon to the Abhidhammattha Sangaha Acariya Anuruddha
states that he wrote the manual at the Mulasoma Monastery, which all
exegetical traditions place in Sri Lanka. There are several ways to rec-
oncile this fact with the concluding stanzas of the Paramattha-vinicchaya,
which state that he was born in Kancipura. One hypothesis is that he
was of South Indian descent but came to Sri Lanka, where he wrote the
Sangaha. Another, advanced by G.P. Malalasekera, holds that he was a
native of Sri Lanka who spent time at Kancipura (which, however, passes
over his statement that he was bom in Kancipura). Still a third hypoth-
esis, proposed by Ven. A.P. Buddhadatta Mahathera, asserts that there
`17
were two different monks named Anuruddha, one in Sri Lanka who
was the author of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha, another in Kancipura
who wrote the Paramattha-vinicchaya.'3
Commentaries on the Sangaha
Owing to its extreme concision, the Abhidhammattha Sangaha cannot
be easily understood without explanation. Therefore to elucidate its terse
and pithy synopsis of the Abhidhamma philosophy, a great number of
tikas or commentaries have been written upon it. In fact, this work has
probably stimulated more commentaries than any other Pali text, writ-
ten not only in the Pali language but also in Burmese, Sinhala, Thai,
etc. Since the fifteenth century Burma has been the international centre
of Abhidhamma studies, and therefore we find many commentaries
written on it by Burmese scholars both in Pali and in Burmese. Com-
mentaries on the Sangaha in Pali alone number nineteen, of which the
following are the most important:
1.	Abhidhammatthasangaha-Tika, also known as the Porana-Tika,
“the Old Commentary.” This is a very small tika written in Sri Lanka
in the twelfth century by an elder named Acariya Navavimalabuddhi.
2.	AbhidhammatthavibhavinJ-Tika, or in brief, the VibhavinI, written
by Acariya Sumangalasami, pupil of the eminent Sri Lankan elder
Sariputta Mahasami, also in the twelfth century. This tika quickly
superceded the Old Commentary and is generally considered the most
profound and reliable exegetical work on the Sangaha. In Burma this
work is known as tlka-gyaw, “the Famous Commentary.” The author is
greatly respected for his erudition and mastery of the Abhidhamma. He
relies heavily on older authorities such as the Abhidhamma-Anutlka and
the Visuddhimagga-Mahatlka (also known as the Pcircunatthamanjusa).
Although Ledi Sayadaw (see below) criticized the VibhavinI extensively
in his own commentary on the Sangaha, its popularity has not dimin-
ished but indeed has even increased, and several Burmese scholars have
risen to defend it against Ledi Sayadaw’s criticisms.
3.	Sankhepa-vannana, written in the sixteenth century by Bhadanta
Saddhamma Jotipala, also known as Chapada Mahathera, a Burmese
monk who visited Sri Lanka during the reign of Parakramabahu VI of
Kotte (fifteenth century).14
4.	Paramatthadlpanl-Tika, “The Elucidation of the Ultimate Mean-
ing/' by Ledi Sayadaw. Ledi Sayadaw of Burma (1846-1923) was one
of the greatest scholar-monks and meditation masters of the Theravada
tradition in recent times. He was the author of over seventy manuals on
different aspects of Theravada Buddhism, including philosophy, ethics,
`18
meditation practice, and Pali grammar. His tika created a sensation in
the field of Abhidhamma studies because he pointed out 325 places in
the esteemed Vibhavinl-tlka where he alleged that errors and misinter-
pretations had occurred, though his criticisms also set off a reaction in
defense of the older work.
5.	Ankura-Tfka, by Vimala Sayadaw. This tlkci was written fifteen
years after the publication of the Paramatthadlpanl and supports the
commonly accepted opinions of the VibhavinI against Ledi Sayadaw’s
criticisms.
6.	Navanlta-Tlkci, by the Indian scholar Dhammananda Kosambi,
published originally in devanagarl script in 1933. The title of this work
means literally “The Butter Commentary, ” and it is so called probably
because it explains the Sangaha in a smooth and simple manner, avoid-
ing philosophical controversy.
Outline of the Sangaha
The Abhidhammattha Sangaha contains nine chapters. It opens by enu-
merating the four ultimate realities—consciousness, mental factors,
matter, and Nibbana. The detailed analysis of these is the project set for
its first six chapters. Chapter I is the Compendium of Consciousness, 
which defines and classifies the 89 and 121 cittas or types of con-
sciousness. In scope this first chapter covers the same territory as the
States of Consciousness chapter of the Dhammasanganl, but it differs
in approach. The canonical work begins with an analysis of the first
triad in the matika, and therefore initially classifies consciousness on
the basis of the three ethical qualities of wholesome, unwholesome,
and indeterminate; then within those categories it subdivides conscious-
ness on the basis of plane into the categories of sense sphere, fine-
material sphere, immaterial sphere, and supramundane. The Sangaha,
on the other hand, not being bound to the matika, first divides con-
sciousness on the basis of plane, and then subdivides it on the basis of
ethical quality.
The second chapter, the Compendium of Mental Factors, first enu-
merates the fifty-two cetasikas or concomitants of consciousness, di-
vided into four classes: universals, occasionals, unwholesome factors, 
and beautiful factors. Thereafter the factors are investigated by two
complimentary methods: first, the method of association (sam-
payoganaya), which takes the mental factors as the unit of inquiry and
elicits the types of consciousness with which they are individually as-
sociated; and second, the method of inclusion or combination
(sangahanaya), which takes the types of consciousness as the unit of
inquiry and elicits the mental factors that enter into the constitution of
`19
each. This chapter again draws principally upon the first chapter of the
Dhammasanganl.
The third chapter, entitled Compendium of the Miscellaneous, clas-
sifies the types of consciousness along with their factors with respect to
six categories: root (hetu), feeling (vedana), function (kicca), door
{dvara), object {arammana), and base (vatthu).
The first three chapters are concerned principally with the structure
of consciousness, both internally and in relation to external variables.
In contrast, the next two chapters deal with the dynamics of conscious-
ness, that is, with its modes of occurrence. According to the
Abhidhamma, consciousness occurs in two distinct but intertwining
modes—as active process and as passive flow. Chapter IV explores the
nature of the “cognitive process,” Chapter V the passive “process-freed”
flow, which it prefaces with a survey of the traditional Buddhist cos-
mology. The exposition here is largely based upon the Abhidhamma
Commentaries. Chapter VI, Compendium of Matter, turns from the
mental realm to the material world. Based primarily on the second chapter
of the Dhammasanganl, it enumerates the types of material phenom-
ena, classifies them in various ways, and explains their modes of origi-
nation. It also introduces the commentarial notion of material groups,
which it treats in detail, and describes the occurrence of material proc-
esses in the different realms of existence. This chapter concludes with a
short section on the fourth ultimate reality, Nibbana, the only uncondi-
tioned element in the system.
With the sixth chapter, Acariya Anuruddha has completed his ana-
lytical exposition of the four ultimate realities, but there remain several
important subjects which must be explained to give a complete picture
of the Abhidhamma. These are taken up in the last three chapters. Chapter
VII, the Compendium of Categories, arranges the ultimate realities into
a variety of categorical schemes that fall under four broad headings: a
compendium of defilements; a compendium of mixed categories, which
include items of different ethical qualities; a compendium of the requi-
sites of enlightenment; and a compendium of the whole, an all-inclu-
sive survey of the Abhidhamma ontology. This chapter leans heavily
upon the Vibhanga, and to some extent upon the Dhammasanganl.
Chapter VIII, the Compendium of Conditionality, is introduced to
include the Abhidhamma teaching on the inter-related ness of physical
and mental phenomena, thereby complementing the analytical treatment
of the ultimate realities with a synthetical treatment laying bare their
functional correlations. The exposition summarily presents two alterna-
tive approaches to conditionality found in the Pali Canon. One is the
method of dependent arising, prominent in the Suttas and analyzed from
`20
both Suttanta and Abhidhamma angles in the Vibhanga (VI). This method
examines conditionality in terms of the cause-and-result pattern that
maintains bondage to samsara, the cycle of birth and death. The other
is the method of the Patthana, with its twenty-four conditional rela-
tions. This chapter concludes with a brief account of concepts (pannatti),
thereby drawing in the Puggalapannatti, at least by implication.
The ninth and final chapter of the Sangaha is concerned, not with
theory, but with practice. This is the Compendium of Meditation Sub-
jects. This chapter functions as a kind of summary of the Visuddhimagga.
It concisely surveys all the methods of meditation exhaustively explained
in the latter work, and it sets forth condensed accounts of the stages of
progress in both systems of meditation, concentration and insight. Like
the masterwork it summarizes, it concludes with an account of the four
types of enlightened individuals and the attainments of fruition and
cessation. This arrangement of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha perhaps
serves to underscore the ultimate soteriological intent of the Abhi-
dhamma. All the theoretical analysis of mind and matter finally con-
verges upon the practice of meditation, and the practice culminates in
the attainment of the supreme goal of Buddhism, the liberation of the
mind by non-clinging.
`21
A Manual of Abhidhamma
(Abhidhammatthasaṅgaho)
`23
|1.1
Having respectfully saluted the Fully Enlightened One, the Peerless One, along with the Sublime Teaching and the Noble Order, I will speak the Manual of Abhidhamma compendium of the things contained in the Abhidhamma.
|
{Having respectfully saluted} (Abhivādiya): It is an established prac-
tice in the Pali Buddhist tradition for expositors of the Dhamma to be-
gin their expositions with a verse of homage to the Triple Gem—the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha—the ultimate refuge for all who
seek the undistorted comprehension of actuality. Thus, following this
custom, with deep devotion the author, Acariya Anuruddha, opens his
treatise with a verse of praise in which he expresses his veneration for
the Triple Gem. A thought of veneration directed towards a worthy ob-
ject is a wholesome kamma that generates merit in the mental continuum
of the person who gives rise to such a thought. When this veneration is
directed towards the most worthy objects of homage —the Triple Gem —
the merit generated is vast and powerful. Such merit, accumulated in
the mind, has the capacity to ward off obstructions to the fulfilment of
one’s virtuous undertakings and to support their successful completion.
Moreover, for a follower of the Buddha the writing of a book on the
Dhamma is a valuable opportunity to develop the perfection of wisdom
(panfiaparanu). Therefore, when beginning his work, the author ex-
presses, with blissful words of praise, his joy at gaining such an oppor-
tunity.
`24
  The Fully Enlightened One (sammasambuddha): The Buddha is
called the Fully Enlightened One because he is the one who has fully
understood by himself the ultimate nature of all phenomena both in their
particular and universal characteristics. The term implies the direct
knowledge of all realities gained without help from a teacher. The Bud-
dha is also called the Peerless One (atula) because his qualities and attri-
butes cannot be matched by any other being. Though all Arahants possess
the distinguished qualities of morality, concentration, and wisdom suf-
ficient to result in liberation, none possess the innumerable and immeas-
urable virtues with which a supreme Buddha is fully endowed—the ten
Tathagata’s powers of knowledge (M.12), the four grounds of self-con-
fidence (M.12), the attainment of great compassion (Pts.i,126), and the
unobstructed knowledge of omniscience (Pts.i,131). Hence the Buddha
is without a peer among all sentient beings. As it is said: “There is one
person, bhikkhus, who is unique, without a peer, without counterpart,
incomparable, unequalled, matchless, unrivalled, the best of humans—
the Tathagata, the Arahant, the Fully Enlightened One” (A. 1:13/i,22).
  The Sublime Teaching (saddhamma): The Teaching, or Dhamma,
signifies the three aspects of study (pariyatti), practice (patipatti), and
realization (pativedha). “Study” is the study of the Tipitaka, the scrip-
tures which record the teachings of the Buddha, comprising the three
collections of the Vinaya, the Suttas, and the Abhidhamma. “Practice”
is the threefold training in virtue, concentration, and wisdom. “Realiza-
tion” is the penetration of the supramundane paths and attainment of the
noble fruits. Each of these is the foundation for the next, since study
provides the guidelines to practice and practice brings the breakthrough
to realization. The Teaching is called “sublime” in the sense of true and
good, because when it is applied in accordance with the Buddha’s in-
structions it definitely leads to the attainment of Nibbana. the supreme
truth and highest good.
  And the Noble Order (ganuttama): The word gaija, meaning com-
pany or group, is used here as a synonym of sangha, the community or
order. There are two kinds of Sangha: the conventional Sangha (sammuti-
sangha), the order of bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, fully ordained monks
and nuns; and the Sangha of noble ones (ariyasangha), referred to in
the verse of homage as “the Noble Order.” The Noble Order is the noble
or holy community of the accomplished followers of the Buddha—
that is, the four pairs of persons who have arrived at the planes of the
noble ones, distinguished as eightfold according to whether they have
reached the paths or the fruits of stream-entry, once-returning, non-
returning, and Arahantship.
`25
  I will speak the Manual of Abhidhamma: The title of the work,
Abhidhammattha Sangaha, literally means “a compendium of the things
contained in the Abhidhamma,” that is, in the Buddha’s special or “dis-
tinguished” (abhi) teaching (dhamma) handed down in the Abhidhamma
Pitaka. The author’s statement, “I will speak” (bhcisissam) reminds us
that our text is meant to be recited and learnt by heart so that it will
always be available to us as an instrument for analyzing reality.
§2 The Fourfold Ultimate Reality [catudha para matt ha)
|1.2
The things contained in the Abhidhamma, spoken of therein, are altogether fourfold from the standpoint of ultimate reality: consciousness, mental factors, matter, and Nibbana.
|
Guide to §2
  From the standpoint of ultimate reality (paramatthato): Accord-
ing to the Abhidhamma philosophy, there are two kinds of realities—
the conventional (sammuti) and the ultimate (paramattha). Conventional
realities are the referents of ordinary conceptual thought (pafinatti) and
conventional modes of expression (vohara). They include such entities
as living beings, persons, men, women, animals, and the apparently stable
persisting objects that constitute our unanalyzed picture of the world.
The Abhidhamma philosophy maintains that these notions do not pos-
sess ultimate validity, for the objects which they signify do not exist in
their own right as irreducible realities. Their mode of being is concep-
tual, not actual. They are products of mental construction (parikappana),
not realities existing by reason of their own nature.
  Ultimate realities, in contrast, are things that exist by reason of their
own intrinsic nature {sabhava). These are the dhammas: the final, irre-
ducible components of existence, the ultimate entities which result from
a correctly performed analysis of experience. Such existents admit of
no further reduction, but are themselves the final terms of analysis, the
true constituents of the complex manifold of experience. Hence the word
paramattha is applied to them, which is derived from parama = ulti-
mate, highest, final, and attha = reality, thing.
`26
I. CITTASANGAHA
  The ultimate realities are characterized not only from the ontologi-
cal angle as the ultimate existents, but also from the epistemological angle
as the ultimate objects of right knowledge. As one extracts oil from
sesame seed, so one can extract the ultimate realities from the conven-
tional realities. For example “being,” and “man, ” and “woman” are con-
cepts suggesting that the things they signify possess irreducible ultimate
unity. However, when we wisely investigate these things with the ana-
lytical tools of the Abhidhamma, we find that they do not possess the
ultimacy implied by the concepts, but only a conventional reality as an
assemblage of impermanent factors, of mental and physical processes.
Thus by examining the conventional realities with wisdom, we eventu-
ally arrive at the objective actualities that lie behind our conceptual con-
structs. It is these objective actualities —the dhammas, which maintain
their intrinsic natures independently of the mind’s constructive func-
tions—that form the ultimate realities of the Abhidhamma.
Although ultimate realities exist as the concrete essences of things,
they are so subtle and profound that an ordinary person who lacks training
cannot perceive them. Such a person cannot see the ultimate realities
because his mind is obscured by concepts, which shape reality into con-
ventionally defined appearances. Only by means of wise or thorough
attention to things (yoniso manasikara) can one see beyond the concepts
and take the ultimate realities as one’s object of knowledge. Thus
paramattha is described as that which belongs to the domain of ulti-
mate or supreme knowledge.1
  Altogether fourfold: In the Suttas the Buddha usually analyzes a
being or individual into five types of ultimate realities, the five
aggregates (paficakkhandha): matter, feeling, perception, mental
formations, and consciousness. In the Abhidhamma teaching the
ultimates are grouped into the four categories enumerated in the text.
The first three—consciousness, mental factors, and matter—comprise
all conditioned realities. The five aggregates of the Suttanta teaching
fit within these three categories. The aggregate of consciousness
(vinnanakkhandha) is here comprised by consciousness (citta), the word
citta generally being employed to refer to different classes of
consciousness distinguished by their concomitants. The middle three
aggregates are, in the Abhidhamma, all included within the category
of mental factors {cetasikas), the mental states that arise along with
consciousness performing diverse functions. The Abhidhamma philo-
sophy enumerates fifty-two mental factors: the aggregates of feeling
and perception are each counted as one factor; the aggregate of mental
formations (sankharakkhandha) of the Suttas is finely subdivided into
fifty mental factors. The aggregate of matter is, of course, identical
I. COMPENDIUM OF CONSCIOUSNESS
`27
with the Abhidhamma category of matter, which will later be divided
into twenty-eight types of material phenomena.
To these three types of reality, which are conditioned, is added a fourth
reality, which is unconditioned. That reality, which is not included in
the five aggregates, is Nibbana, the state of final deliverance from the
suffering inherent in conditioned existence. Thus in the Abhidhamma philosophy there are altogether these four ultimate realities: consciousness, mental factors, matter, and Nibbana.

§3 Four Classes of Consciousness {catubbidha citta)
|1.3
Of them, consciousness, firstly, is fourfold: (i) sense-sphere consciousness; (ii) fine-material-sphere consciousness; (iii) immaterial-sphere consciousness; (iv) supramundane consciousness.
|
Guide to §3
  Consciousness: The first chapter of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha
is devoted to an examination of citta, consciousness or mind, the first
of the four ultimate realities. Consciousness is taken up for study first
because the focus of the Buddhist analysis of reality is experience, and
consciousness is the principal element in experience, that which consti-
tutes the knowing or awareness of an object.
  The Pali word citta is derived from the verbal root citi, to cognize,
to know. The commentators define citta in three ways: as agent, as in-
strument, and as activity. As the agent, citta is that which cognizes an
object (arammanmn cintetl ti cittam). As the instrument, citta is that by
means of which the accompanying mental factors cognize the object
(etena cintent! ti cittam). As an activity, citta is itself nothing other than
the process of cognizing the object (cintanamattam cittam).
  The third definition, in terms of sheer activity, is regarded as the most
adequate of the three: that is, citta is fundamentally an activity or proc-
ess of cognizing or knowing an object. It is not an agent or instrument
possessing actual being in itself apart from the activity of cognizing. The
definitions in terms of agent and instrument are proposed to refute the
wrong view of those who hold that a permanent self or ego is the agent
and instrument of cognition. The Buddhist thinkers point out, by means
of these definitions, that it is not a self that performs the act of cogni-
tion, but citta or consciousness. This citta is nothing other than the act
`28
I. CITTASANGAHA
of cognizing, and that act is necessarily impermanent, marked by rise
and fall.
  To elucidate the nature of any ultimate reality, the Pali commentators
propose four defining devices by means of which it can be delimited.
These four devices are: (1) its characteristic (lakkhana), i.e. the salient
quality of the phenomenon; (2) its function (rasa), its performance of a
concrete task (kicca) or achievement of a goal (sampatti); (3) its
manifestation {paccupatthana), the way it presents itself within experi-
ence; and (4) its proximate cause (padatthana), the principal condition
upon which it depends.
  In the case of citta, its characteristic is the knowing of an object
(vijanana). Its function is to be a “forerunner” (pubbangama) of the
mental factors in that it presides over them and is always accompanied
by them. Its manifestation —the way it appears in the meditator’s experi-
ence—is as a continuity of processes (sandhana). Its proximate cause
is mind-and-matter (namarupa), because consciousness cannot arise
alone, in the complete absence of mental factors and material phenomena.
  While citta has a single characteristic as the cognizing of an object,
a characteristic that remains the same in all its diverse manifestations,
the Abhidhamma distinguishes citta into a variety of types. These types,
also called cittas, are reckoned as 89 or, by a finer method of differen-
tiation, as 121. (See Table 1.1.) What we ordinarily think of as conscious-
ness is really a series of cittas, momentary acts of consciousness, occurring
in such rapid succession that we cannot detect the discrete occasions,
which are of diverse types. The Abhidhamma not only distinguishes the
types of consciousness, but more importantly, it also exhibits them as
ordered into a cosmos, a unified and closely interwoven whole.
  To do so it employs several overlapping principles of classifica-
tion. The first of these, introduced in the present section of the
Sangaha, is the plane (bhumi) of consciousness. There are four planes
of consciousness. Three are mundane: the sense sphere, the fine-
material sphere, and the immaterial sphere; the fourth plane is the
supramundane. The word avacara, “sphere,” which qualifies the first
three planes, means “that which moves about in, or frequents, a
particular locality.” The locality frequented is the plane of existence
(also bhumi) designated by the name of the sphere, that is, the sen-
suous, tne rme-materiai, ana tne immaterial planes or existence.
However, though the three spheres of consciousness have a particu-
larly close connection with the corresponding planes of existence,
they are not identical. The spheres of consciousness are categories for
classifying types of cittas, the planes of existence are realms or worlds
into which beings are reborn and in which they pass their lives.
30	I. CITTASANGAHA
A definite relation nevertheless exists between the spheres of con-
sciousness and the planes of existence: a particular sphere of conscious-
ness comprises those types of consciousness which are typical of the
corresponding plane of existence and v^/hich frequent that plane by tend-
ing to arise most often there. Consciousness of a particular sphere is not
tied to the corresponding plane, but may arise in other planes of exist-
ence as well; for instance, fine-material and immaterial-sphere cittas can
arise in the sensuous plane, and sense-sphere cittas can arise in the fine-
material and immaterial planes. But still a connection is found, in that a
sphere of consciousness is typical for the plane that shares its name.
Moreover, the kammically active cittas of any particular sphere, the cittas
that generate kamma, tend to produce rebirth into the corresponding plane
of existence, and if they succeed in gaining the opportunity to generate
rebirth, they will do so only in that plane, not in any other plane. Hence
the tie between the spheres of consciousness and the corresponding planes
of existence is extremely close.
Sense-sphere consciousness (kamavacaracitta): The word kama
means both subjective sensuality, i.e. craving for sense pleasures, and
objective sensuousness, i.e. the five external sense-objects —visible forms,
sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles. The kamabhumi is the sensuous
plane of existence, which comprises eleven realms—the four woeful
states, the human realm, and the six sensuous heavens. Sense-sphere
consciousness includes all those cittas that have their proper domain in
the sensuous plane of existence, though they may arise in other planes
as well.
Fine-material-sphere consciousness (rupavacaracitta): The fine-
material sphere is the plane of consciousness corresponding to the fine-
material plane of existence (rupabhnmi), or the plane of consciousness
pertaining to the states of meditative absorption called the rupajjhanas.
Any consciousness which mostly moves about in this realm is under-
stood to belong to the fine-material sphere. The rupajjhanas are so called
because they are usually attained in meditation by concentrating on a
material object (rHpa), which may be a device such as the earth-kasina,
etc. (see IX, §6) or the parts of one’s own body, etc. Such an object
becomes the basis on which the jhanas are developed. The exalted states
of consciousness attained on the basis of such objects are called
rupavacaracitta, consciousness of the fine-material sphere.
Immaterial-sphere consciousness (arupavacaracitta)'. The immate-
rial sphere is the plane of consciousness corresponding to the immate-
rial plane of existence (arupabhumi), or the plane of consciousness
pertaining to the immaterial absorptions—the arupajjhanas. Any con-
sciousness which mostly moves about in this realm is understood to
I. COMPENDIUM OF CONSCIOUSNESS	31
belong to the immaterial sphere. When one meditates to attain the form-
less meditative states bevond the runaiihanas. one must discard all ob-
jects connected with material form and focus upon some non-material
object, such as the infinity of space, etc. The exalted states of conscious-
ness attained on the basis of such objects are called arupavacaracitta,
consciousness of the immaterial sphere.
Supramundane consciousness (lokuttaracitta): The word lokuttara,
supramundane, is derived from loka = world, and uttara = beyond, tran-
scendent to. The concept of “world” is threefold: the world of living
beings (sattaloka), the physical universe (okasaloka), and the world of
formations (sankharaloka), that is, the totality of conditioned phenom-
ena, physical and mental. The notion of world relevant here is the world
of formations, that is, all mundane phenomena included within the five
aggregates of clinging. That which transcends the world of conditioned
things is the unconditioned element, Nibbana, and the types of conscious-
ness that directly accomplish the realization of Nibbana are called
lokuttaracitta, supramundane consciousness. The other three types are
called, in distinction, lokiyacitta, mundane consciousness.
We thus see that consciousness can be classified by way of plane into
four broad divisions: sense-sphere consciousness, fine-material-sphere
consciousness, immaterial-sphere consciousness, and supramundane
consciousness. Consciousness can also be classified on the basis of other
principles besides plane. One principle of classification that plays an
important role in the Abhidhamma philosophy is kind or nature (jati).
With respect to its nature, consciousness divides into four classes:
unwholesome, wholesome, resultant, and functional. Unwholesome
consciousness (akusalacitta) is consciousness accompanied by one or
another of the three unwholesome roots—greed, hatred, and delusion.
Such consciousness is called unwholesome because it is mentally
unhealthy, morally blameworthy, and productive of painful results.
Wholesome consciousness (kusalacitta) is consciousness accompanied
by the wholesome roots—non-greed or generosity, non-hatred or loving-
kindness, and non-delusion or wisdom. Such consciousness is mentally
healthy, morally blameless, and productive of pleasant results.
Both wholesome and unwholesome consciousness constitute kamma,
volitional action. Those cittas or states of consciousness that arise through
the ripening of kamma are called resultants {vipaka). These constitute a
third class of citta distinct from the former two, a class that comprises
both the results of wholesome kamma and the results of unwholesome
kamma. It should be understood that both kamma and its results are
32	I. CITTASANGAHA
purely mental. Kamma is volitional activity associated with wholesome
or unwholesome cittas; its results are other cittas which experience the
maturation of kamma.
The fourth class of consciousness, according to the division by way
of nature, is called in Pali kiriya or kriya, rendered here as “functional.”
This type of consciousness is neither kamma nor kamma resultant. It
involves activity, yet this activity is not kammically determinate and thus
is not capable of producing kammic results.
Resultant consciousness and functional consciousness are neither
wholesome nor unwholesome. Instead, they are classified as indetermi-
nate (abyakata), that is, consciousness which cannot be determined in
terms of the dichotomy of wholesome and unwholesome.
Sense-Sphere Consciousness—54
(kamavacaracittani)
Unwholesome Gonsciousness—12
{akusalacittanl)
§4 Consciousness Rooted in Greed (lobhamOlacittanl)—8
|1.4
Amongst them what pertains to the sense sphere?
1.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with wrong view, unprompted.
2.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with wrong view, prompted.
3.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from wrong view, unprompted.
4.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from wrong view, prompted.
5.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with wrong view, unprompted.
6.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with wrong view, prompted.
7.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from wrong view, unprompted.
8.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from wrong view, prompted.
These eight types of consciousness are accompanied by greed.
|
Guide to §4
Unwholesome consciousness: In analyzing unwholesome conscious-
ness, the Abhidhamma first classifies it by way of its most prominent
root (mlila, hetu), whether greed (lobha), hatred (dosa), or delusion
(moha). Greed and hatred, according to the Abhidhamma, are mutually
exclusive: they cannot coexist within the same citta. Thus those states
of consciousness in which greed is the principal root are termed “cittas
rooted in greed,” of which eight are enumerated. Those states in which
hatred is the principal root are termed “cittas rooted in hatred,” of which
two are enumerated. The third unwholesome root, delusion, is present
in every state of unwholesome consciousness. Thus, in those cittas rooted
in greed and in those rooted in hatred, delusion is also found as an under-
lying root. Nevertheless, there are types of consciousness in which de-
lusion arises without the accompaniment of greed or hatred. These
cittas— two in number—are called consciousness involving sheer de-
lusion or “cittas rooted in delusion.” (See Table 1.2.)
Consciousness rooted in greed (lobhamiilacittani): The Abhi-
dhamma begins its analysis of the three classes of unwholesome con-
sciousness by distinguishing the different cittas rooted in greed, as greed
is always mentioned first among the unwholesome roots. The Pali word
lobha includes all varieties of greed ranging from intense passion or
cupidity to subtle liking and attachment. Consciousness rooted in greed
is divided into eight types on the basis of three principles of
dichotomization. One is the concomitant feeling {vedana), whether a
34	I. CITTASANGAHA
feeling of joy or equanimity; the second is the presence or absence of
wrong view; the third is the consideration whether the citta is prompted
or unprompted. From the permutations of these three distinctions, eight
types of consciousness are obtained.
Accompanied by joy (somanassasaha^ata): The word somanassa,
joy, is derived from su = pleasant + manas = mind; thus it means liter-
ally a pleasant mental state. Somanassa is a type of feeling, specifically,
pleasant mental feeling. All consciousness is accompanied by some feel-
ing, which may be bodily or mental, pleasant, painful, or neutral.
Somanassa is a feeling which is mental rather than bodily, and pleasant
rather than painful or neutral. This feeling “accompanies” (sahagata)
this type of consciousness in that it is inextricably blended with it, just
as when the waters of two rivers meet, they blend together and cannot
be distinguished.
The Abhidhamma describes four cittas rooted in greed that are ac-
companied by joy. The other four cittas in this class are accompanied
by equanimity (upekkhasahagata). The word upekkha is often used in
the Pali texts to signify the lofty spiritual quality of equanimity or impar-
tiality, the state of mind which cannot be swayed by biases and prefer-
ences. Here, however, the word is used simply to mean neutral feeling,
a mental feeling which leans neither towards gladness nor dejection. In
contrast to pleasant and painful feelings, which experience the object in
diametrically opposed ways, upekkha experiences the object in a neu-
tral manner. Thus upekkha or equanimous feeling is also called
adukkhamasukha vedana, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
Associated with wrong view (ditthigatasampayutta): Having divided
the greed-rooted consciousness into two classes on the basis of feeling —
as accompanied by joy or by equanimity—the text again divides that
same consciousness on the basis of its relationship to wrong view. The
word ditthi means view, and unless it is specified by the prefix samma,
“right, ” it generally refers to wrong view (miccha ditthi).2 Wrong view
accompanies the consciousness rooted in greed as a conviction, belief,
opinion or rationalization. The view may either reinforce the attachment
from which the consciousness springs by providing it with a rational justi-
fication, or the view itself may be an object of attachment in its own
right. Wrong view is associated with four types of consciousness in all—
two accompanied by joy and two accompanied by equanimity. The other
four are dissociated from wrong view (ditthigatavippayutta), in that greed
operates in them without any accompanying justification provided by a
view.
Unprompted (asankharika): The third differentiating principle of
consciousness rooted in greed is the presence or absence of prompting.
`36
The multisignificant word sankhara is used here in a sense specific to
the Abhidhamma to mean prompting, instigation, inducement (payoga),
or the application of an expedient (upaya). This prompting may be im-
posed by others, or it may originate from within oneself; the means
employed may be bodily, verbal, or purely mental. The instigation is
bodily when someone induces us by bodily means to give rise to par-
ticular types of consciousness which may issue in corresponding actions.
It is verbal when the means employed is another’s command or power
of persuasion. And it is mental when, either by reflection or the deter-
mination of the will, we make a deliberate endeavour, despite inner re-
sistance, to generate certain types of consciousness. Prompting can be
associated with either unwholesome or wholesome states of conscious-
ness, as will be shown below. That consciousness which arises sponta-
neously, without prompting or inducement by expedient means, is called
unprompted. That consciousness which arises with prompting or induce-
ment by expedient means is called prompted (sasankharika). In the greed-
rooted class of consciousness, four types are unprompted or spontaneous,
and four types are prompted or induced.

§5 Consciousness Rooted in Hatred (dosamOlacittanl)—2
|1.5
9. One consciousness, accompanied by displeasure, associated with aversion, unprompted.
10. One consciousness, accompanied by displeasure, associated with aversion, prompted.
These two types of consciousness are associated with aversion.
|
Guide to §5
Consciousness rooted in hatred (dosamiilacittani): The second class
of unwholesome consciousness analyzed by the Abhidhamma is that
rooted in hatred, the second of the three unwholesome roots. This con-
sciousness is of two kinds, distinguished simply as unprompted and
prompted. In contrast to consciousness rooted in greed, which can arise
with alternative types of feeling—either joy or equanimity —conscious-
ness rooted in hatred arises with only one kind of feeling, that of dis-
pleasure. Again, unlike consciousness rooted in greed, consciousness
37
rooted in hatred does not arise in association with wrong view. Although
wrong view can motivate acts of hatred, according to the Abhidhamma
the wrong view does not arise simultaneously with hate, in the same citta,
but at an earlier time in a different type of citta.
Accompanied by displeasure {domanassasahagata): The feeling that
accompanies states of consciousness rooted in hatred is displeasure. The
Pali word domanassa, derived from du = bad + manas = mind, signi-
fies unpleasant mental feeling. This feeling accompanies only conscious-
ness rooted in hatred, and such consciousness is necessarily accompanied
by this feeling. Thus displeasure, or unpleasant mental feeling, is always
unwholesome; in this respect it differs from unpleasant bodily feeling,
which is kammically indeterminate, and from joy and equanimity, which
may be wholesome, unwholesome, or indeterminate.
Associated with aversion (patighasampayutta): Whereas conscious-
ness rooted in greed is explicitly said to be accompanied by greed, con-
sciousness rooted in hatred (dosa) is expounded under the synonymous
term aversion (patigha). Patigha includes all degrees of aversion, from
violent rage to subtle irritation. The word means literally “striking
against,” which indicates a mental attitude of resistance, rejection, or
destruction.
Though displeasure and aversion always accompany each other, their
qualities should be distinguished. Displeasure {domcmcissa) is the expe-
rience of unpleasant feeling, aversion {patigha) is the mental attitude of
ill will or irritation. In terms of the five aggregates, displeasure is in-
cluded in the aggregate of feeling (vedannkkhandha), while aversion is
included in the aggregate of mental formations (sankharakkhanadha).
§6 Consciousness Rooted in Delusion (mohamOlacittani)—2
|1.6
11. One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with doubt.
12. One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with restlessness.
|1.7
These two types of consciousness involve sheer delusion.
Thus end, in all, the twelve types of unwholesome consciousness.
|
`38
Guide to §6
Consciousness rooted in delusion (mohamulacittani): This last class
of unwholesome consciousness comprises those cittas in which the other
two unwholesome roots—greed and hatred—are absent. Usually delu-
sion leads to the arising of greed or hatred as well. But though delusion
is always present as a root in cittas accompanied by greed and hate, its
function there is subordinate. In these last two types of unwholesome
consciousness, however, delusion alone is present as an unwholesome
root, and thus they are classified as consciousness rooted in delusion.
Because the function of delusion is especially evident in these two types
of consciousness, they are also described as consciousness involving sheer
delusion (momuhacitta), the Pali word momuha being an intensification
of moha, delusion. There are two types of consciousness in which delu-
sion is especially prominent: one is associated with doubt, the other with
restlessness.
Accompanied by equanimity {upekkhasahagata): Even if a desir-
able object is present when a delusion-rooted consciousness arises, it is
not experienced as desirable and thus pleasant mental feeling {somanassa)
does not arise. Similarly, an undesirable object is not experienced as such
and thus unpleasant mental feeling (domanassa) does not arise. Moreo-
ver, when the mind is obsessed by doubt or restlessness, it is not capa-
ble of forming a determinate positive or negative evaluation of the object,
and thus cannot be associated with either pleasant or painful feeling. For
these reasons the feeling that accompanies these two cittas is neutral,
the feeling of equanimity (upekkha).
Associated with doubt (vicikicchasampayutta): The commentators
give two etymological explanations of the word vicikiccha: (i) vexation
due to perplexed thinking; and (ii) being devoid of the remedy consist-
ing in knowledge.3 Both these explanations indicate that vicikiccha,
doubt, means perplexity, skepticism or indecisiveness, due to the preva-
lence of delusion. The citta associated with this doubt is the first type
of consciousness rooted in delusion.
Associated with restlessness (uddhaccasampayutta): Restlessness is
disquietude, mental distraction, or agitation, and the citta infected by this
restlessness is the second type of consciousness rooted in delusion. Ac-
cording to the Abhidhamma, the mental factor of restlessness is found
in all twelve unwholesome cittas (see II, §13), but in the other eleven
cittas its force (satti) is relatively weak and its function is secondary.
However, in this last type of citta, restlessness becomes the chief fac-
tor; thus this last type alone is described as consciousness associated
with restlessness.
It should be noted that no qualification in terms of prompted or
I. COMPENDIUM OF CONSCIOUSNESS	39
unprompted is attached to the description of these two cittas rooted in
delusion. The commentators offer different explanations for this omis-
sion. The Vibhavinl-Tika and the Maha-Tlka to the Visuddhimagga main-
tain that the distinction in terms of prompting is omitted because neither
alternative is applicable. They state that since these two cittas lack natu-
ral acuteness, they cannot be described as unprompted; and since there
is no occasion when one deliberately tries to arouse them, they cannot
be described as prompted. Ledi Sayadaw, however, rejects this position,
holding these cittas to be exclusively unprompted. He contends: “Since
these two cittas occur in beings naturally, by their own intrinsic nature,
they need not be aroused by any inducement or expedient means. They
always occur without trouble or difficulty. Therefore they are exclusively
unprompted, and this should be seen as the reason the distinction by way
of prompting is not mentioned here.”
§7 Summary of Unwholesome Consciousness
|1.8
Eight are rooted in greed, two in hatred, and two in delusion. Thus there are twelve types of unwholesome consciousness.
|
Guide to §7
The eight types of consciousness rooted in greed may be illustrated
by the following cases:
1.With joy, holding the view that there is no evil in stealing, a
boy spontaneously steals an apple from a fruit stall.
2.With joy, holding the same view, he steals an apple through the
prompting of a friend.
3-4 The same as 1 and 2 except that the boy does not hold any wrong view.
5-8 These four are parallel to 1-4 except that the stealing is done with neutral feeling.
5-8 These four are parallel to 1-4 except that the stealing is done with neutral feeling.
The two types rooted in hatred may be illustrated thus:
9.With hatred one man murders another in a spontaneous fit of rage.
10.With hatred one man murders another after premeditation.
`40
I. CITTASANGAHA
The two types rooted in delusion may be illustrated thus:
11	A person, due to delusion, doubts the enlightenment of the Bud-
dha or the efficacy of the Dhamma as a way to deliverance.
12	A person is so distracted in mind that he cannot focus his mind
on any object.
Rootless Consciousness—18
(ahetukacittan!)
§8 Unwholesome-Resultant Consciousness
|1.9
(1) Eye-consciousness accompanied by equanimity; as are
(2) ear-consciousness,
(3) nose-consciousness,
(4) tongue-consciousness;
(5) body-consciousness accompanied by pain; 
(6) receiving consciousness accompanied by equanimity; 
(7) investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity. 
These seven are the unwholesome resultant types of consciousness.
|
Guide to §8
Rootless consciousness (ahetukacittani): The word ahetuka means
without roots, and qualifies those types of consciousness that are devoid
of the mental factors called hetu, roots. These types, eighteen in number,
do not contain any of the three unwholesome roots—greed, hatred, and
delusion—nor do they contain the three bright roots—non-greed, non-
hatred, and non-delusion —which may be either wholesome or indeter-
minate. Since a root is a factor which helps to establish stability in a
citta, those cittas which lack roots are weaker than those which possess
them. The eighteen cittas in this class fall into three groups: unwhole-
some-resultants, wholesome-resultants, and functional consciousness.
(See Table 1.3.)
Unwholesome-resultant consciousness (akusalavipakacittani): The
first category of rootless consciousness comprises the seven types of con-
sciousness that result from unwholesome kamma. These types of conscious-
ness are not themselves unwholesome but kammically indeterminate
I. COMPENDIUM OF CONSCIOUSNESS	41
(abyakata). The word “unwholesome” (akusala) here means that they
are born.
Eye-consciousness {cakkhuvihhana): The first five types of result-
ant consciousness in both classes, the unwholesome-resultants and the
wholesome-resultants, are those that are based on the sensitive matter
(pasada) of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body. These ten cittas are
collectively designated the “two sets of fivefold sense consciousness”
(dvi-pancavinnana).
Eye-consciousness arises based upon eye-sensitivity (cakkhu-pasada).
Its function is simply to see, to cognize directly and immediately, the
visible object. The other types of sense consciousness also arise based
upon their respective sensitivity, and their function is simply to cognize
their respective objects —to hear sounds, to smell smells, to taste tastes,
and to feel tangibles. In the case of unwholesome-resultants, the object
is unpleasant or undesirable (an iff ha). However, the impact of the ob-
ject on the first four sense faculties is weak and thus the associated feeling
is neutral, i.e. equanimity. But in the case of unwholesome-resultant
body-consciousness, the object’s impact on the body faculty is strong, 
and thus the accompanying feeling is bodily pain (dukkha).
Receiving consciousness {sampaticchanacitta): When a sense object
impinges on a sense faculty at one of the five sense doors, e.g. a visible
form on the eye, first there arises a citta adverting to the object. Imme-
diately after this, eye-consciousness arises seeing that form. This act of
seeing lasts onlv for a single mind-moment. Immediately thereafter arises
cve-consciousness. This is the receiving consciousness, which results
from the same type of kamma that produced the eye-consciousness.
Investigating consciousness (santiranacitta): This is another root-
less resultant consciousness, which arises immediately after the receiv-
ing consciousness. Its function is to investigate or examine the object
that had just been cognized by the sense consciousness and apprehended
by the receiving consciousness. The receiving consciousness and the in-
vestigating consciousness arise only in the five sense doors, and both
are results of past kamma.
§9 Wholesome-Resultant Rootless Consciousness
(kusala vipaka-ahetukacittani)—8
`42
|1.10
(8) Eye-consciousness accompanied by equanimity; as are 
(9) ear-consciousness, 
(10) nose-consciousness, 
(11) tongue-consciousness;
(12) body-consciousness accompanied by pleasure; 
(13) receiving consciousness accompanied by equanimity; 
(14) investigating consciousness accompanied by joy; 
(15) investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity. 
These eight are the wholesome-resultant types of rootless consciousness.
|
Guide to § 9
Wholesome-resultant rootless consciousness (kusalavipaka-
ahetukacittani): The eight types of consciousness in this category are
results of wholesome kamma. In the designation of the previous class, 
the word ahetuka was not included because all unwholesome-resultants
are rootless; there are no unwholesome-resultants that are accompanied
by roots. However, as will be seen later, wholesome-resultants can be
accompanied by roots, namely, by beautiful roots that are kammically
indeterminate {abyakata). To distinguish the wholesome-resultants that
are rootless from those with roots, the word ahetuka is included in their
class designation.
Seven of these types of consciousness correspond to the unwhole-
some-resultants. But whereas the unwholesome-resultants arise in regard
to an undesirable object, the wholesome-resultants arise in regard to an
object that is desirable (iffha) or extremely desirable (ati-ittha). The first
four sense consciousnesses here, like their counterparts, are associated
with equanimity, that is, neutral feeling; but the impact of the object on
the body being strong, the feeling associated with wholesome-resultant
body-consciousness is that of bodily pleasure (sukha).
The rootless wholesome-resultants include one type of consciousness
without a counterpart among the unwholesome-resultants. This is the
investigating consciousness accompanied by joy (somanassa). Whereas
the investigating consciousness resulting from unwholesome kamma is
always accompanied by neutral feeling, that resulting from wholesome
kamma is twofold: one accompanied by neutral feeling, arisen in regard
to a moderately desirable object, and one accompanied by joy, which
arises when the object is especially desirable. Thus there are eight types
of consciousness in this class, in contrast to the seven types found in
the former class.
`43 table 1.3
`44
§10 Rootless Functional Consciousness
{ahetukakiriya-cittani)—3
|1.11
(16) Five-sense-door adverting consciousness accompanied by equanimity; as is 
(17) mind-door adverting consciousness; 
(18) smile-producing consciousness accompanied by joy. These three are the rootless functional types of consciousness.
|1.12
Thus end, in all, the eighteen types of rootless consciousness.
|
Guide to §10
Rootless functional consciousness (ahetukakiriyacittani): The re-
maining three types of consciousness among the ahetukas are not kammic
results. They belong to the categoiy called kiriya, rendered here as “func-
tional” to indicate that they perform tasks which do not have any kammic
potency. Such types of consciousness are neither causal kamma nor the
result of kamma. Within this category, three types of consciousness are
rootless, the rest (described later) are with roots.
Five-sense-door adverting consciousness (pancadvaravajjanacitta):
When an external sense object impinges on one of the five physical sense
organs, before the appropriate sense consciousness can arise—e.g. eye-
consciousness seeing a form—another consciousness must have arisen
first. This consciousness is the five-sense-door adverting consciousness,
which has the function of adverting (avajjana) to whatever object is
presenting itself at one of the five sense doors (dvara). This conscious-
ness does not see, hear, smell, taste, or touch the object. It simply turns
to the object, thereby enabling the sense consciousness to arise in im-
mediate succession.
Mind-door adverting consciousness (manodvaravajjanacitta): This
type of consciousness can arise either in a cognitive process occurring
at the five sense doors or in a process occurring at the mind door. In
each case it performs a different function. When it occurs in a five-door
process it is called the votthapanacitta, determining consciousness. Its
function then is to determine, or define, the object that has been cognized
by sense consciousness. In the five-door process, determining
consciousness succeeds the investigating consciousness. After the
investigating consciousness has examined the object, the determining
consciousness discriminates it.
`45
In a mind-door process—a cognitive process that occurs through the internal ideation faculty—this same type of consciousness performs another function. Its function then is to advert to the object appearing at the mind door. In such a role this citta is known as the mind-door adverting consciousness.
Smile-producing consciousness {hasituppadacitta): This is a citta peculiar to Arahants, including Buddhas and Paccekabuddhas who are also types of Arahants. Its function is to cause Arahants to smile about sense-sphere phenomena. 
According to the Abhidhamma, Arahants may smile with one of five cittas—the four beautiful sense-sphere functional cittas (I, §15) and the rootless smile-producing consciousness mentioned here.
§11 Summary of Rootless Consciousness
|1.13
Seven are unwholesome-resultants. Wholesome-resultants are eightfold. Three are functionals. Thus the rootless are eighteen.
|
§12 Beautiful Consciousness (sobhanacittanl)
|1.14
Excluding those that are evil and the rootless, the rest are called “beautiful.” They number either fifty-nine or ninety-one.
|
Guide to §12

Beautiful consciousness (sobhanacittani): Beautiful consciousness
includes all cittas “excluding those that are evil, ” that is, the twelve types
of unwholesome consciousness, and “the rootless, ” the eighteen types
that are utterly devoid of roots. This type of consciousness is called
beautiful because it is accompanied by beautiful mental factors (cetasikas
—see II, §§ 5-8).
It should be understood that the beautiful (sobhana) has a wider range
than the wholesome {kusala). The beautiful includes all wholesome cittas,
but it also includes resultant and functional cittas that possess beautiful
mental factors. These latter cittas are not wholesome but kammically
indeterminate {abyakata). The beautiful comprises the twenty-four sense-
sphere cittas (to be defined just below) as well as all fine-material-sphere
`46
cittas, immaterial-sphere cittas, and supramundane cittas. Those cittas
other than the beautiful are called asobhana, non-beautiful.
Either fifty-nine or ninety-one: The fifty-nine beautiful cittas are
obtained thus: 24 sense-sphere + 15 fine-material-sphere + 12 immaterial-
sphere + 8 supramundane. A total of ninety-one is obtained by dividing
the supramundane cittas into forty types rather than eight, as will be
explained below (I, §§30-31).
Sense-Sphere Beautiful Consciousness—24
(kama vacara-sobhanacittani)
§13 Sense-Sphere Wholesome Consciousness
[kamavacara-kusalacittani)—8
|1.15
1.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
2.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, prompted.
3.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
4.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
5.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
6.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, prompted.
7.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
8.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
These are the eight types of sense-sphere wholesome consciousness with roots.
|
`48
Guide to §13
Sense-sphere wholesome consciousness {kamavacara-kusalacittaniy.
This class of consciousness is divided into eight types on the basis of
three principles of dichotomization. One is the concomitant feeling, which
in four cases is joy (somanassa), i.e. pleasant mental feeling, and in four
cases equanimity (upekkha), i.e. neutral mental feeling; a second is the
presence or absence of knowledge; and a third is the dyad of unprompted
and prompted. (See Table 1.4.)
Associated with knowledge {nanasampayutta): Knowledge compre-
hends things as they are {yathasabhavam). In the consciousness associ-
ated with knowledge, the word nana refers to the mental factor of wisdom
ipanfia-cetasika), which also represents the root non-delusion (amoha).
Consciousness dissociated from knowledge (nanavippayutta) lacks this
factor of wisdom, but it does not involve ignorance (avijja) or delusion
(moha), which pertains only to unwholesome consciousness.
Unprompted: According to the commentary, one does a good deed
without prompting due to physical and mental fitness, good food and
climate, etc., and as a result of having performed similar deeds in the
~table 1.4
past. Prompting occurs through inducement by another or by personal
deliberation, as explained above (p.36).
With roots (sahetuka): The four wholesome cittas associated with
knowledge possess all three wholesome roots; the four dissociated from
knowledge possess non-greed or generosity and non-hate or loving-kind-
ness, but lack non-delusion.
The eight types of wholesome sense-sphere consciousness may be
illustrated by the following examples:
1	Someone joyfully performs a generous deed, understanding that
this is a wholesome deed, spontaneously without prompting.
2	Someone performs the same good deed, with understanding, af-
ter deliberation or prompting by another.
3	Someone joyfully performs a generous deed, without prompt-
ing, but without understanding that this is a wholesome deed.
4	Someone joyfully performs a generous deed, without under-
standing, after deliberation or prompting by another.
5-8 These types of consciousness should be understood in the same
way as the preceding four, but with neutral feeling instead of
joyful feeling.
These eight types of consciousness are called wholesome (kusala) or
meritorious (punna) because they inhibit the defilements and produce
good results. They arise in worldlings (puthujjana) and trainees
(sekkha)—noble disciples at the three lower stages of stream-enterer,
once-returner, and non-returner—whenever they perform wholesome
bodily deeds and verbal deeds and whenever they generate wholesome
states of mind pertaining to the sense sphere. These cittas do not arise
in Arahants, whose actions are without kammic potency.
§14 Sense-Sphere Resultant Consciousness
(kamavacara- vipakacittani)—8
`49
|1.16
9.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
10.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, prompted.
11.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
12.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
13.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
14.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, prompted.
15.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
16.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
These are the eight types of sense-sphere resultant consciousness with roots.
|
Guide to §14
Sense-sphere resultant consciousness with roots (sahetuka-
kamavacara-vipakacittaniy. As there are eight wholesome types of con-
sciousness, there are also eight corresponding types of resultant
consciousness. These eight cittas are kammic effects of the sense-sphere
wholesome cittas. In order to differentiate them from the rootless
resultants due to wholesome kamma, these are described as sahetuka,
“with roots.” Both the rootless wholesome-resultants and the rooted
resultants are produced by the same eight wholesome cittas, but the two
sets differ in their qualities and functions. These differences will become
clearer when we discuss the functions of consciousness (III, §§8-11).
§15 Sense-Sphere Functional Consciousness
(kama vacara-kriyacittam)—8
|1.17
17.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
18.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, associated with knowledge, prompted.
19.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
20.One consciousness, accompanied by joy, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
21.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, unprompted.
22.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, associated with knowledge, prompted.
23.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, unprompted.
24.One consciousness, accompanied by equanimity, dissociated from knowledge, prompted.
These are the eight types of sense-sphere functional consciousness with roots.
|1.18
Thus end, in all, the twenty-four types of sense-sphere consciousness with roots—wholesome, resultant, and functional.
|
Guide to §15
Sense-sphere functional consciousness with roots (sahetuka-kamavacara-kriyacittani): Whereas the eight wholesome sense-sphere cittas arise in worldlings and trainees, they do not arise in Buddhas and Arahants, who have transcended the cycle of kamma and future becoming in the realms of rebirth.
However, in Buddhas and Arahants there arise eight types of consciousness which are their exact counterparts.
These are called kriya (kiriya) or functional cittas because they merely perform their functions without leaving any kammic deposit. 
Because a Buddha or an Arahant has eradicated all traces of ignorance and craving, the causes of rebirth, there is no way his good actions could generate future results. They merely arise, accomplish some function, and then fall away without residue.
§16 Summary of Sense-Sphere Beautiful Consciousness
|1.19
The sense-sphere consciousness with roots—understood as wholesome, resultant, and functional —becomes twenty-four by classification according to feeling, knowledge, and prompting.
|
Guide to §16
Sense-sphere consciousness with roots becomes threefold as wholesome, resultant, and functional, and each of these divides into eight through permutation by way of feeling either joyful or neutral; by way
of presence or absence of knowledge; and by way of spontaneity or prompting.
Thus there are twenty-four types of consciousness altogether—the twelve connected with knowledge having three roots, the other twelve having two roots. 
These three groups are often referred to as the mahakusalas, mahavipakas, and mahakiriyas—the great wholesome cittas, the great resultants, and the great functionals—though the teachers give different explanations of the prefix malm, meaning “great.”
§17 Summary of Sense-Sphere Consciousness
|1.20
In the sense-sphere twenty-three are resultant, twenty are wholesome and unwholesome, and eleven are functional. Thus there are altogether fifty-four.
|
Guide to §17
All types of consciousness experienced in the sense-sphere total fifty-four.
These are classified as follows:
By way of kind:
8 great wholesome
12 unwholesome
23 resultants:
7 unwholesome-resultants
8 rootless wholesome-resultants
8 great wholesome-resultants
`52
11 functionals:
3 rootless functionals
8 great functionals
18 with joy
32 with equanimity
2 with displeasure
1 with pleasure
1 with pain
Bv way of feeling:
By way of association with knowledge and views:
16 associated
16 dissociated
22 neither
By way of prompting:
17 unprompted
17 prompted
20 neither (= rootless and deluded).

The traditional monastic way of teaching Abhidhamma urges students
not only to reflect on these lists but to know them well by heart. They
are very important when one studies the mental factors comprised in these
types of cittas, as expounded in the next chapter and in the Abhidhamma
Pitaka.
Fine-material-Sphere Consciousness—15
(rupavacaracittan!)
§18 Fine-material-Sphere Wholesome Consciousness—5
`53
|1.21
I. First jhana wholesome consciousness together with initial application, sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
2.Second jhana wholesome consciousness together with sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
3.Third jhana wholesome consciousness together with zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
4.Fourth jhana wholesome consciousness together with happiness and one-pointedness.
5.Fifth jhana wholesome consciousness together with equanimity and one-pointedness.
These are the five types of fine-material-sphere wholesome consciousness.
§19 Fine-material-Sphere Resultant Consciousness—5
|1.22
1.First jhana resultant consciousness together with initial application, sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
2.Second jhana resultant consciousness together with sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
3.Third jhana resultant consciousness together with zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
4.Fourth jhana resultant consciousness together with happiness and one-pointedness.
5.Fifth jhana resultant consciousness together with equanimity and one-pointedness.
These are the five types of fine-material-sphere resultant consciousness.
|
§20 Fine-material-Sphere Functional Consciousness—5
|1.23
1.First jhana functional consciousness together with initial application, sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
2.Second jhana functional consciousness together with sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
3.Third jhana functional consciousness together with zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
4.Fourth jhana functional consciousness together with happiness and one-pointedness.
5.Fifth jhana functional consciousness together with equanimity and one-pointedness.
These are the five types of fine-material-sphere functional consciousness.
|1.24
Thus end, in all, the fifteen types of fine-material-sphere wholesome, resultant, and functional consciousness.
|
Guide to §§18-20
Fine-material-sphere consciousness (rupavacaracittani)'. This sphere
of consciousness includes all the cittas which “move about in” or per-
tain to the fine-material plane of existence (rupabhiimi), the realms in
which gross matter is absent and only a subtle residue of matter remains.
Rebirth into these realms is achieved by the attainment of the medita-
tive states called jhanas,4 high attainments in the development of con-
centration {samadhi). The states of consciousness which “frequent” this
plane, in that they are qualitatively connected to it, are called “fine-
material-sphere consciousness.”
Fifteen cittas fall into this category—five wholesome, five resultant,
and five functional (Table 1.5). The wholesome fine-material-sphere
cittas are experienced by worldlings and trainees (sekkha) who develop
the jhanas within this life itself. Their corresponding results (vipaka) arise
only in the fine-material world, in the beings who have been reborn there
as a consequence of developing the jhanas. The five functional (kriya)
jhana cittas are experienced only by Arahants who attain the jhanas.
`55 table1.5
The commentators derive the Pali word jhana from a root meaning
“to contemplate,” and again from another root meaning “to burn up.”
Thus the jhanas are so called because they closely contemplate the ob-
ject and because they burn up the adverse states opposed to concentra-
tion.5 The adverse states are the five hindrances (nlvarana) of sensual
desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restlessness and worry, and doubt.
The jhanas are attained by the method of meditation called the
development of calm or serenity (samathabhavana). This type of medi-
tation involves the strengthening of the faculty of concentration
{samadhi). By fixing the mind upon a single selected object, all mental
distraction is eliminated. The hindrances are suppressed and the mind
becomes fully absorbed in its object. The development of calm will be
dealt with in detail later (see IX, §§2-21).
The object of the jhana-consciousness is a mental image called the
counterpart sign (patibhaganimitta). This sign is considered a concep-
tual object (pafinatti), but it generally arises on the basis of a visible
form, and hence these jhanas pertain to the fine-material sphere. The
meditator aspiring to jhana may select as the original object of concen-
tration a contemplative device called a kasina, such as a coloured disk,
on which attention is fixed. When concentration matures, this physical
device will give rise to a visualized replica of itself called the “learning
sign” (uggaljanimitta), and this in turn gives rise to the counterpart sign
apprehended as the obiect of jhana.
Fine-material-sphere wholesome consciousness: This category com-
prises five cittas distinguished by way of the five jhanas, each jhana
constituting a distinct type of citta. The jhanas are enumerated in the
order given for two reasons: (i) because, when one meditates for the
attainment of the jhanas, one achieves them in this order; and (ii) be-
cause the Buddha taught them in this order.
First jhana wholesome consciousness: Each jhana is defined by
way of a selection of mental concomitants called its jhana factors
(jhananga). From among the many mental factors contained in each
jhana consciousness, it is these that distinguish the specific jhana
from the other jhanas and bring about the process of absorption. The
first jhana contains five factors, as enumerated in the text. To at-
tain the first jhana, these five factors must all be present in a bal-
anced way, closely contemplating the object and “burning up” the
five hindrances that obstruct absorption.
Initial application (vitakka): In the Suttas the word vitakka is often
used in the loose sense of thought, but in the Abhidhamma it is used in
a precise technical sense to mean the mental factor that mounts or di-
rects the mind onto the object.6 Just as a king’s favourite might conduct
a villager to the palace, even so vitakka directs the mind onto the ob-
ject. In the practice for attaining jhana, vitakka has the special task of
inhibiting the hindrance of sloth and torpor (thlnamiddha).
Sustained application (vicara): The word vicara usually means ex-
amination, but here it signifies the sustained application of the mind on
the object. Whereas vitakka is the directing of the mind and its concomi-
tants towards the object, vicara is the continued exercise of the mind
on the object. The Commentaries offer various similes to highlight the
difference between these two jhana factors. Vitakka is like a bird’s spread-
ing out its wings to fly, vicara is like the bird’s gliding through the air
with outstretched wings. Vitakka is like a bee’s diving towards a flower,
vicara is like the bee’s buzzing above the flower. Vitakka is like the hand
that holds a tarnished metal dish, vicara is like the hand that wipes the
dish.7 Vicara in the jhanas serves to temporarily inhibit the hindrance
of doubt (vicikiccha).
Zest (pīti): Pīti, derived from the verb plnayati meaning “to refresh,”
may be explained as delight or pleasurable interest in the object. The
term is often translated as rapture, a rendering which fits its role as a
jhana factor but may not be wide enough to cover all its nuances.8 The
commentators distinguish five grades of pni that arise when developing
concentration: minor zest, momentary zest, showering zest, uplifting zest,
and pervading zest. Minor zest is able to raise the hairs on the body.
Momentary zest is like flashes of lightning. Showering zest breaks over
the body again and again like waves on the sea shore. Uplifting zest can
cause the body to levitate. And pervading zest pervades the whole body
as an inundation fills a cavern. The latter is identified as the piti present
in jhana.9 As a factor of jhana piti inhibits the hindrance of ill will
(vyapada).
Happiness {sukha): This jhana factor is pleasant mental feeling. It
is identical with somanassa, joy, and not with the sukha of pleasant
bodily feeling that accompanies wholesome-resultant body-conscious-
ness. This sukha, also rendered as bliss, is born of detachment from sen-
sual pleasures; it is therefore explained as niramisasukha, unworldly or
spiritual happiness. It counters the hindrance of restlessness and worry
(uddhaccakukkuccd).
Though piti and sukha are closely connected, they are distinguished
in that piti is a conative factor belonging to the aggregate of mental for-
mations {sankharakkhandha), while sukha is a feeling belonging to the
aggregate of feeling (vedancikkhandha). Piti is compared to the delight
a weary traveller would experience when coming across an oasis, sukha
to his pleasure after bathing and drinking.10
One-pointedness (ekaggata): The Pali term means literally a one
`58
(eka) pointed (agga) state (ta). This mental factor is the primary com-
ponent in all five jhanas and the essence of concentration (samadhi). One-
pointedness temporarily inhibits sensual desire, a necessary condition
for any meditative attainment. Ekaggata exercises the function of closely
contemplating the object, the salient characteristic of jhana, but it can-
not perform this function alone. It requires the joint action of the other
four jhana factors each performing its own special function: vitakka
applying the associated states on the object, vicara sustaining them there,
piti bringing delight in the object, and sukha experiencing happiness in
the jhana.
Second jhana wholesome consciousness, etc.: The higher jhanas are
attained by successively eliminating the grosser jhana factors and by
refining the subtler factors through strengthened concentration. In the
Suttas the Buddha expounds the jhanas as fourfold by teaching the
simultaneous elimination of vitakka and vicara in progressing from the
first jhana to the second. In the Abhidhamma the jhanas become five-
fold by the inclusion of an intermediate jhana in which vitakka has been
eliminated while vicara remains. This is the second jhana in the Abhi-
dhamma scheme.
In the third jhana vicara as well is eliminated, in the fourth piti is
made to fade away, and in the fifth jhana upekkha, equanimity or neu-
tral feeling, replaces sukha, happiness, as the concomitant feeling. Thus, 
whereas the cittas of the first four jhanas are associated with joy
(somanassasahita), the citta of the fifth jhana is associated with equa-
nimity (upekkhasahita).
According to the Suttanta method, which enumerates four jhanas of
the fine-material sphere, the first jhana is identical in all respects with
the first jhana of the Abhidhamma method. However, the second jhana
of the Suttanta method is attained by the simultaneous subsiding of ini-
tial application and sustained application, and thus has only the three
jhana factors of zest, happiness, and one-pointedness, like the third jhana
of the Abhidhamma method. The third jhana of the Suttanta method has
the two factors of happiness and one-pointedness, the fourth jhana the
two factors of equanimity (i.e. neutral feeling) and one-pointedness.
These two jhanas are equivalent to the fourth and fifth jhanas respec-
tively of the Abhidhamma method.
Although the Suttas do not mention the fivefold analysis of jhana in
explicit terms, they provide an implicit basis for this analysis in the Bud-
dha’s distinction between three kinds of concentration: concentration ac-
companied by both initial application and sustained application;
concentration without initial application but with sustained application; and
concentration with neither initial application nor sustained application
`59
(savitakka savicara samadhi, avitakka vicaramatta samadhi, avitakka
avicara samadhi: M.128/iii,162). The first is obviously the first jhana
in both systems, and the third is the second and higher jhanas of the
Suttanta method and the third and higher jhanas of the Abhidhamma
method. The second, however, is nowhere clarified within the Suttas
themselves and only becomes intelligible as the second jhana of the
Abhidhamma method.
§21 Summary of Fine-material-Sphere Consciousness
|1.25
Fine-material-sphere consciousness is fivefold when divided by way of the jhanas.
It becomes of fifteen types when (further) divided by way of the wholesome, resultant, and functional.
|
Guide to §21
The five jhanas become of fifteen types by occurring as
wholesome cittas, as resultants, and as functionals. Each jhana citta
of the same level is defined by the same set of factors, whether
wholesome, resultant or functional. All cittas of the fine-material
sphere are associated with knowledge (nanasampayutta), though
knowledge, not being a specific jhana factor, is not mentioned in
the formulas. Thus all the fine-material-sphere cittas have three roots,
non-greed, non hatred, and non-delusion.
It should be noted that, in contrast with sense-sphere wholesome and
unwholesome cittas, the fine-material-sphere cittas are not distinguished
by way of prompted and unprompted {sasankharika-ascmkhanka). The
same distinction is also omitted from the exposition of the immaterial-
sphere and supramundane cittas. This omission is made because, when
one is practising meditation to attain a jhana, a path, or a fruit, as long
as one is dependent upon instigation from others or upon one’s own self-
prompting,  the mind is not yet in a suitable condition to reach the at-
tainment. The distinction of prompted and unprompted is appropriate
in relation to the preliminary phase of practice leading up to the attain-
ment, but the cittas with which the actual attainment takes place cannot
involve prompting or inducement. Thus, in the absence of a real possi-
bility of prompted jhana and supramundane attainment, the very distinc-
tion between prompted and unprompted becomes untenable in relation
to these types of cittas.
The view we have expressed here differs from the commonly accepted
`60
opinion ot the VibHavim-llka that, since all jhana attainment requires
some preliminary exertion (pubbabhisankhcira), the jhana cittas can never
be called unprompted but only prompted. This view seems untenable
because the preliminary exertion leading up to the jhana should not be
identified as a “prompting” concomitant with the jhana cittas themselves.
Thus, despite the prestigious authority of the VibhavinI, it still seems
preferable to regard the prompted-unprompted distinction as irrelevant
to the higher classes of consciousness.
Nevertheless, Ledi Sayadaw holds that this distinction may be under-
stood to apply to the jhanas and supramundane states by reason of the
distinction made in the texts in the mode of progress (patipadci) by which
they are gained. The Dhammasanganl distinguishes between attainments
gained by difficult progress (dukkhapatipada), when the defilements can
only be suppressed by intense striving and much exertion, and easy
progress (sukhapatipada), when the defilements can be suppressed eas-
ily, in a pleasant mode. Ledi Sayadaw takes the jhana or supramundane
cittas of one who reaches attainment by difficult progress to be the
counterpart of prompted cittas at the sense-sphere level, and the jhana
or supramundane cittas of one who proceeds by easy progress to be the
counterpart of unprompted cittas.
However, while Ledi Sayadaw’s view is noteworthy, the fact remains
that: (1) the Dhammasanganl initially classifies the jhana and supra-
mundane cittas without any reference to mode of progress; and (2) in
tne section wnere it aoes introduce ciassmcation Dy moae or progress,
it does not use this distinction as a basis for enumerating distinct types
of jhana or supramundane cittas. It therefore seems preferable to exclude
the prompted-unprompted distinction altogether from the jhana cittas,
as well as from the path and fruition cittas.
Immaterial-Sphere Consciousness—12
§22 Immaterial-Sphere Wholesome Consciousness—4
`61
|1.26
1. Wholesome consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite space.
2.Wholesome consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite consciousness.
3.Wholesome consciousness pertaining to the base of nothingness.
4.Wholesome consciousness pertaining to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
These are the four types of immaterial-sphere wholesome consciousness.
§23 Immaterial Sphere Resultant Consciousness—4
|1.27
1.Resultant consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite space.
2.Resultant consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite consciousness.
3.Resultant consciousness pertaining to the base of nothingness.
4. Resultant consciousness pertaining to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
These are the four types of immaterial-sphere resultant consciousness.
§24 Immaterial-Sphere Functional Consciousness—4
|1.28
1.Functional consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite space.
2.Functional consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite consciousness.
3.Functional consciousness pertaining to the base of nothingness.
4.Functional consciousness pertaining to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
These are the four types of immaterial-sphere functional consciousness.
|1.29
Thus end, in all, the twelve types of immaterial-sphere wholesome, resultant, and functional consciousness.
|
`62
Guide to §§22-24
Immaterial-sphere consciousness (ariipavacaracittaiii): This sphere
of consciousness comprises the cittas pertaining to the immaterial plane
of existence (arupabhumi), four realms in which matter has been totally
transcended and only consciousness and mental factors remain. Rebirth
into these four realms comes about through the attainment of the
arupajjhanas, the four immaterial or formless absorptions, which are
reached by developing concentration beyond the five jhanas of the fine-
material sphere. The immaterial sphere consists of twelve cittas—the four
wholesome cittas with which the immaterial attainments are experienced
by worldlings and trainees, the four resultants which arise through re-
birth in the immaterial realms, and the four functionals which occur to
Arahants who enter upon the immaterial attainments.
The base of infinite space (akasanancayatana): The first of the four
immaterial jhanas is the attainment of the base of infinite space. To reach
this, a meditator who has mastered the fifth fine-material jhana based
on a kasina object spreads out the counterpart sign of the kasina until it
becomes immeasurable in extent. Then he removes the kasina by attend-
ing only to the space it pervaded, contemplating it as “infinite space.”
Through repeated attention given in this way, there eventually arises in
absorption a citta having as object the concept of infinite space
(akcisapannatti). The expression “base of infinite space, ” strictly speak-
ing, refers to the concept of infinite space which serves as the object of
the first immaterial-sphere consciousness. Here, the word ayatana,
“base,” has the sense of a habitat or dwelling for the citta of the jhana.
However, in a derivative sense, the expression “base of infinite space”
is also extended to the jhana itself.
The base of infinite consciousness (vinhanaiicayatana): The con-
sciousness that is here said to be infinite is the consciousness of the first
immaterial absorption. Since that first immaterial absorption has as its
object the base or concept of infinite space, this implies that the con-
sciousness which pervades that space as its object also partakes in its
infinity. To reach this attainment, therefore, the meditator takes as object
`63
the consciousness of the base of infinite space, and contemplates it as
“infinite consciousness” until the second immaterial absorption arises.
The base of nothingness {akincahhayatana): The third immaterial
attainment has as its object the present non-existence, voidness, or
secluded aspect of the consciousness pertaining to the base of infinite
space. By giving attention to the absence of that consciousness, the third
immaterial absorption arises taking as its object the concept of non-
existence or nothingness (natthibhava-pannatti) in respect of the first
immaterial consciousness.
The base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception (i yevasanhan ’
asahiiayatana): This fourth and final immaterial attainment is so called
because it cannot be said either to include perception or to exclude per-
ception. In this type of consciousness, the factor of perception (saniia)
has become so subtle that it can no longer perform the decisive func-
tion of perception, and thus this state cannot be said to have perception.
Yet perception is not altogether absent but remains in a residual form;
thus it cannot be said not to have perception. Although perception alone
is mentioned, all the other mental constituents in this citta also exist in
a state of such extreme subtlety that they cannot be described as either
existent or non-existent. This fourth immaterial absorption takes as its
object the consciousness of the base of nothingness, the third immate-
rial absorption.
§25 Summary of Immaterial-Sphere Consciousness
|1.30
Immaterial-sphere consciousness is fourfold when classified by way of object.
When again divided by way of the wholesome, resultant, and the functional, it stands at twelve types.
|
Guide to §25
When classified by way of object: In relation to each type of im-
material-sphere consciousness, there are two kinds of object (alambana)
to be understood: one is the object to be directly apprehended by the
citta (alambitabba); the other is the object to be transcended (atik-
kamitabba). Their correlations are shown in Table 1.6.
The arupajjhanas differ from the rupajjhanas in several important
respects. While their rupajjhanas can take various objects such as the
different kasinas, etc., each ariipajjhana apprehends just one object spe-
cific to itself. Also, the rupajjhanas differ from each other with respect
`64 table 1.6
to their jhana factors—the first having five factors, the second four, etc.
The meditator who wishes to attain the higher jhanas keeps the same
object and eliminates each successively subtler factor until he reaches
the fifth jhana. But to progress from the fifth rupajjhana to the first
arUpajjhcina, and from one arupajjhana to the next, there are no more
jhana factors to be transcended. Instead the meditator progresses by tran-
scending each successively subtler object.
The cittas of the arupajjhanas all have the same two jhana factors as
the fifth riipajjhcina, namely, equanimity and one-pointedness. For this
reason the four arupajjhanas are sometimes spoken of as being included
in the fifth rupaj jhcina. As cittas they are different because they pertain
to a different sphere and have different types of objects than the fifth
jhana. But because, as jhanas, they are constituted by the same two jhana
factors, they are sometimes considered by the teachers of Abhidhamma
as modes of the fifth jhana.
Collectively, the fifteen fine-material-sphere cittas and the twelve
immaterial-sphere cittas are designated mahaggatacitta—sublime, lofty,
or exalted consciousness—because they are free from the hindrances and
are pure, elevated, great states of mind.
All the eighty-one types of consciousness discussed so far are termed
lokiyacitta, mundane consciousness, because they pertain to the three
worlds—the sensuous world (kamaloka), the fine-material world
(riipaloka), and the immaterial world (ariipaloka).
`65
Supramundane Consciousness—8
§26 Supramundane Wholesome Consciousness—4
|1.31
1.	Path consciousness of stream-entry.
2.	Path consciousness of once-returning.
3.	Path consciousness of non-returning.
4.	Path consciousness of Arahantship.
These are the four types of supramundane wholesome consciousness.
|
§27 Supramundane Resultant Consciousness—4
|1.32
1.	Fruition consciousness of stream-entry.
2.	Fruition consciousness of once-returning.
3.	Fruition consciousness of non-returning.
4.	Fruition-consciousness of Arahantship.
These are the four types of supramundane resultant consciousness.
|1.33
Thus end, in all, the eight types of supramundane wholesome and resultant consciousness.
|
§28 Summary of Supramundane Consciousness
|1.34
The wholesome consciousness is fourfold, divided by way of the four paths.
So too are the resultants, being their fruits.
Thus the supramundane should be understood as eightfold.
|
`66
Guide to §§26-28
Supramundane consciousness (lokiittaracittani): Supramundane
consciousness is consciousness that pertains to the process of transcend-
ing (uttara) the world (loka) consisting of the five aggregates of cling-
ing. This type of consciousness leads to liberation from samsara, the
cycle of birth and death, and to the attainment of Nibbana, the cessa-
tion of suffering. There are eight supramundane cittas. These pertain to
the four stages of enlightenment —stream-entry, once-returning, non-re-
turning, and Arahantship. Each stage involves two types of citta, path
consciousness (maggacitta) and fruition consciousness (phalacitta), as
seen in Table 1.7. All supramundane cittas take as object the uncondi-
tioned reality, Nibbana, but they differ as paths and fruits according to
their functions. The path consciousness has the function of eradicating
(or of permanently attenuating)11 defilements; the fruition consciousness
has the function of experiencing the degree of liberation made possible
by the corresponding path. The path consciousness is a kusalacitta, a
wholesome state; the fruition consciousness is a vipakacitta, a result-
ant.
TABLE 1.7: THE EIGHT SUPRAMUNDANE CITTAS
Each path consciousness arises only once, and endures only for one
mind-moment; it is never repeated in the mental continuum of the per-
son who attains it. The corresponding fruition consciousness initially
arises immediately after the path moment, and endures for two or three
mind-moments. Subsequently it can be repeated, and with practice can
be made to endure for many mind-moments, in the supramundane ab-
sorption called fruition attainment {phalasamapatti—see below, IV, §22;
IX, §42).
The paths and fruits are attained by the method of meditation called
`67
the development of insight (vipassanabhavana). This type of medita-
tion involves the strengthening of the faculty of wisdom {pafina). By
sustained attention to the changing phenomena of mind and matter, the
meditator learns to discern their true characteristics of impermanence, 
suffering, and non-self. When these insights gain full maturity, they
issue in the supramundane paths and fruits. (See IX, §§22-44.)
Path consciousness of stream-entry (sotapatti-maggacitta): The
entry upon the irreversible path to liberation is called stream-entry, and
the citta that experiences this attainment is the path consciousness of
stream-entry. The stream (sota) is the Noble Eightfold Path, with its eight
factors of right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right live-
lihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. As the
current of the Ganges flows uninterrupted from the Himalayas to the
ocean, so the supramundane Noble Eightfold Path flows uninterrupted
from the arising of right view to the attainment of Nibbana.
Though the factors of the eightfold path may arise in the mundane
wholesome cittas of virtuous worldlings, these factors are not fixed in
their destination, since a worldling may change character and turn away
from the Dhamma. But in a noble disciple who has reached the experi-
ence of stream-entry, the path factors become fixed in destiny, and flow
like a stream leading to Nibbana.
The path consciousness of stream-entry has the function of cutting
off the first three fetters —“personality view” or wrong views of self,
doubt about the Triple Gem, and clinging to rites and ceremonies in the
belief that they can lead to liberation. It further cuts off all greed, hatred
and delusion strong enough to lead to a sub-human rebirth. This citta
also permanently eliminates five other cittas, namely, the four cittas rooted
in greed associated with wrong view, and the citta rooted in delusion
associated with doubt. One who has undergone the experience of stream-
entry is assured of reaching final deliverance in a maximum of seven
lives, and of never being reborn in any of the woeful planes of existence.
Path consciousness of once-returning (sakadagami-maggacitta):
This citta is the consciousness associated with the Noble Eightfold Path
that gives access to the plane of a once-returner. While it does not eradi-
cate any fetters, this citta attenuates the grosser forms of sensual desire
and ill will. The person who has reached this stage will be reborn in
this world at most one more time before attaining liberation.
Path consciousness of non-returning {anagami-maggacitta): One
who attains the third path will never again be reborn in the sensuous
plane. If such a person does not reach Arahantship in the same lifetime,
he will be reborn in the fine-material world and there attain the goal.
The path consciousness of non-returning cuts off the fetters of sensual
`68
desire and ill will; it also permanently eliminates the two cittas rooted in hate.
Path consciousness of Arahantship (arahatta-maggacitta): An Arahant is a fully liberated person, one who has destroyed (hata) the enemy (ari) consisting of the defilements.
The path consciousness of Arahantship is the citta that issues directly in the full liberation of Arahantship. 
This citta destroys the five subtle fetters—desire for fine-material and immaterial existence, conceit, restlessness, and ignorance.
It also eliminates the remaining types of unwholesome cittas—the four rooted in greed dissociated from views and the one rooted in delusion associated with restlessness.
Fruition consciousness (phalacitta): Each path consciousness issues automatically in its respective fruition in the same cognitive series, in immediate succession to the path. Thereafter the fruition citta can arise many times when the noble disciple enters the meditative attainment of fruition. 
The fruition consciousness, as mentioned earlier, is classified by way of kind as a resultant {vipaka). 
It should be noted that there are no supramundane functional (kiriya) cittas. That is because when an Arahant enters fruition attainment, the cittas that occur in that attainment
belong to the class of resultants, being fruits of the supramundane path.
§29 Comprehensive Summary of Consciousness
|1.35
Thus there are twelve unwholesome types of consciousness, and twenty-one wholesome types.
Resultants are thirty-six in number, and functional types of consciousness are twenty.
|1.36
There are fifty-four sense-sphere types of consciousness, and fifteen assigned to the fine-material sphere. 
There are twelve types of consciousness in the immaterial sphere, and eight that are supramundane.
|
Guide to §29
In these verses, Acariya Anuruddha summarizes all the eighty-nine
states of consciousness that he has so far expounded in this Compen-
dium of Consciousness. In the first verse he divides these according to
their nature or kind (jati) into four classes (see Table 1.8):
12	unwholesome cittas (akusala);
21	wholesome cittas (kusala);
36	resultant cittas (vipaka);
20	functional cittas (kiriya).
The last two classes are grouped together as kammically indetermi-
nate (abyakata), since they are neither wholesome nor unwholesome.
TABLE 1.8: THE 89 CITTAS BY KIND
	Unwholesome	Wholesome	Indeterminate	
			Resultant	Functional
ss	12	8	23	11
FMS		5	5	5
IS		4	4	4
SPM		4	4	...
	12	21	36	20
In the second verse he divides the same eighty-nine cittas by way of the plane of consciousness (bhiimi) into another four classes (see Table 1.9):
54 sense-sphere cittas (kamavacara);
15 fine-material-sphere cittas (rUpcivacara);
12 immaterial-sphere cittas (ariipavacara);
8 supramundane cittas (lokuttara).
Thus, although citta is one in its characteristic of cognizing an object, it becomes manifold when it is divided according to different criteria into various types.
`70 table1.9
121 Types of Consciousness
§30 In Brief
|1.37
These different classes of consciousness, which thus number eighty-nine, the wise divide into one hundred and twenty-one.
§31 In Detail
|1.38
How does consciousness which is analyzed into eighty-nine types become of one hundred and twenty-one types?
1.The first jhana path consciousness of stream-entry together with initial application, sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
2.The second jhana path consciousness of stream-entry together with sustained application, zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
3.The third jhana path consciousness of stream-entry together with zest, happiness, and one-pointedness.
4.The fourth jhana path consciousness of stream-entry together with happiness and one-pointedness.
5.The fifth jhana path consciousness of stream-entry together with equanimity and one-pointedness.
These are the five types of path consciousness of stream-entry.
|1.39
So too for the path consciousness of once-returning, of non-returning, and of Arahantship, making twenty types of path consciousness. 
|1.40
Similarly, there are twenty types of fruition consciousness. Thus there are forty types of supramundane consciousness.
|
`72
Guide to §§30-31
All meditators reach the supramundane paths and fruits through the
development of wisdom (paiina)—insight into the three characteristics
of impermanence, suffering, and non-self. However, they differ among
themselves in the degree of their development of concentration
{samadhi). Those who develop insight without a basis of jhana are called
practitioners of bare insight (sukkhavipassaka). When they reach the path
and fruit, their path and fruition cittas occur at a level corresponding to
the first jhana.
Those who develop insight on the basis of jhana attain a path and
fruit which corresponds to the level of jhana they had attained before
reaching the path. The ancient teachers advance different views on the
question of what factor determines the jhana level of the path and fruit.
One school of thought holds that it is the basic jhana {padakajjliana),
i.e. the jhana used as a basis for concentrating the mind before develop-
ing the insight that culminates in attainment of the supramundane path.
A second theory holds that the ihana level of the oath is determined by
the jhana used as an object for investigation by insight, called the com-
prehended or investigated jhana {sammasitajjhcina). Still a third school
TABLE 1.10: THE FORTY SUPRAMUNDANE CITTAS
	Path				Fruit			
Jhana	S.E.	O.R.	NR.	Arh.	S.E.	O.R.	NR.	Arh.
1st	(82)	(87)	(92)	(97)	(102)	(107)	(112)	(117)
2nd	(83)	(88)	(93)	(98)	(103)	(108)	(113)	(118)
3rd	(84)	(89)	(94)	(99)	(104)	(109)	(114)	(119)
4th	(85)	(90)	(95)	(100)	(105)	(110)	(115)	(120)
5th	(86)	(91)	(96)	(101)	(106)	(111)	(116)	(121)

`73
of thought holds that when a meditator has mastered a range of jhanas,
he can control the jhana level of the path by his personal wish or incli-
nation (ajjhasaya).12
Nevertheless, no matter what explanation is adopted, for bare insight
meditator and jhana meditator alike, all path and fruition cittas are
considered types of jhana consciousness. They are so considered because
they occur in the mode of closely contemplating their object with full
absorption, like the mundane jhanas, and because they possess the jhana
factors with an intensity corresponding to their counterparts in the
mundane jhanas. The supramundane jhanas of the paths and fruits differ
from the mundane jhanas in several important respects. First, whereas
the mundane jhanas take as their object some concept, such as the sign
of the kasina, the supramundane jhanas take as their object Nibbana, the
unconditioned reality. Second, whereas the mundane jhanas merely
suppress the defilements while leaving their underlying seeds intact, the
supramundane jhanas of the path eradicate defilements so that they can
never again arise. Third, while the mundane jhanas lead to rebirth in
the fine-material world and thus sustain existence in the round of rebirths,
the jhanas of the path cut off the fetters binding one to the cycle and
thus issue in liberation from the round of birth and death. Finally, whereas
the role of wisdom in the mundane jhanas is subordinate to that of
concentration, in the supramundane jhanas wisdom and concentration
are well balanced, with concentration fixing the mind on the uncon-
ditioned element and wisdom fathoming the deep significance of the Four
Noble Truths.
According to the constellation of their jhana factors, the path and
fruition cittas are graded along the scale of the five jhanas. Thus instead
of enumerating the supramundane consciousness as eightfold by way of
the bare paths and fruits, each path and fruition consciousness can be
enumerated as fivefold according to the level of jhana at which it may
occur. When this is done, the eight supramundane cittas, each taken at
all of the five jhanic levels, become forty in number, as shown in Table
1.10.
§32 Concluding Summary
`74
|1.41
Dividing each (supramundane) consciousness into five kinds according to different jhana factors, the supramundane consciousness, it is said, becomes forty.
|1.42
As the fine-material-sphere consciousness is treated by division into first jhana consciousness and so on, even so is the supramundane consciousness. 
The immaterial-sphere consciousness is included in the fifth jhana.
Thus the jhanas beginning from the first amount to eleven, they say. 
The last jhana (i.e. the fifth) totals twenty-three.
|1.43
Thirty-seven are wholesome, fifty-two are resultants; thus the wise say that there are one hundred and twenty-one types of consciousness.
Thus ends the first chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Consciousness.
|
Guide to §32
The immaterial-sphere consciousness is included in the fifth jhana:
As explained earlier, the arupajjhanas have the same two jhana factors as the fifth rupajjhana, and are therefore considered modes of the fifth jhana.
Thus when a meditator uses an arupajjhana as a basis for developing
TABLE 1.11: JHANA CITTAS — MUNDANE
AND SUPRAMUNDANE
	Fine-material 15		Immaterial 12		Supramundane 40		
Jhana	Wh. Rst.	Fnc.	Wh. Rst.	Fnc.	Wh.	Rst.	Total
1st	1 1	1	......	…	4	4	11
2nd	1 1	1	......	…	4	4	11
3rd	1 1	1	......	...	4	4	11
4th	1 1	1	......	…	4	4	11
5th	1 1	1	4 4	4	4	4	23
	5 5	5	4 4 4		20	20	
`75
insight, his path and fruition consciousness become fifth jhana
supramundane cittas.
The jhanas beginning from the first amount to eleven: Each jhana
from the first to the fourth occurs one each as fine-material-sphere whole-
some, resultant, and functional ( = 3), and four each by way of the paths
and fruits ( = 8); thus eleven.
The last ... totals twenty-three: The fifth jhana considered as em-
bracing both the last rUpajjhana and the four arupajjhanas thus com-
prises five each as wholesome, resultant, and functional ( = 15), and eight
as supramundane, for a total of twenty-three. (See Table 1.11.)
The thirty-seven wholesome and fifty-two resultants are obtained by
replacing the four supramundane wholesome and resultant cittas with
twenty each. Thus the total number of cittas in the Compendium of Con-
sciousness increases from 89 to 121.



CHAPTER II
COMPENDIUM OF MENTAL FACTORS
§1 Introductory
|2.1
The fifty-two states associated with consciousness that arise and cease together (with consciousness), that have the same object and base (as consciousness), are known as mental factors.
|
Guide to § 1
States associated with consciousness {cetoyutta dhamma): The sec-
ond chapter of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha is devoted to the classifi-
cation of the second type of ultimate reality, the cetasikas or mental
factors. The cetasikas are mental phenomena that occur in immediate
conjunction with citta or consciousness, and assist citta by performing
more specific tasks in the total act of cognition. The mental factors cannot
arise without citta, nor can citta arise completely segregated from the
mental factors. But though the two are functionally interdependent, citta
is regarded as primary because the mental factors assist in the cogni-
tion of the object depending upon citta, which is the principal cognitive
element. The relationship between citta and the cetasikas is compared
to that between a king and his retinue. Although one says “the king is
coming,” the king does not come alone, but he always comes accompa-
nied by his attendants. Similarly, whenever a citta arises, it never arises
alone but always accompanied by its retinue of cetasikas.1
In the Compendium of Mental Factors, Acariya Anuruddha will first
enumerate all the mental factors in their appropriate classes (§§2-9).
Thereafter he will investigate the mental factors from two complemen-
tary points of view. The first of these is called the method of associa-
tion (sampayoganaya). This method takes the mental factors as the basis
of inquiry and seeks to determine which types of citta each mental fac-
tor is associated with (§§10-17). The second point of view is called the
`77
method ot combination or inclusion (sangahanava). This method takes
the citta as primary and seeks to determine, for each type of citta, which
mental factors are combined within it (§§18-29).
That arise and cease together (with consciousness): The first verse
defines the mental factors by way of four characteristics that are com-
mon to them all:
(1)	arising together with consciousness (ekuppcida);
(2)	ceasing together with consciousness (ekanirodha);
(3)	having the same object as consciousness {ekalambana)
(4)	having the same base as consciousness (ekavatthuka).
These four characteristics delineate the relationship between the citta
and its concomitant cetasikas. If only “arising together” were mentioned,
the definition would include (wrongly) as cetasikas those material phe-
nomena that arise simultaneously with the citta, that is, material phe-
nomena produced by mind and by kamma. However, these material
phenomena do not all perish at the same time as the co-arisen citta, but
mostly endure for seventeen mind-moments. Thus to exclude them the
characteristic “ceasing together” is introduced.
Again, there are two material phenomena—bodily intimation and
vocal intimation2 —which arise and cease together with consciousness.
However, these material phenomena do not take an object, and this dis-
tinguishes mental phenomena—both citta and cetasikas—from material
phenomena: all mental phenomena experience an object, co-arisen citta
and cetasikas experience the same object, while material phenomena do
not experience any object at all. Thus the third characteristic is stated,
that of having the same object.
Finally, in those realms in which the aggregate of material form is
found, i.e. in the sensuous world and the fine-material world, the citta
and its cetasikas have the same physical base, that is, they arise with
the common support of either one of the material sense organs or the
heart-base.3 This is the fourth characteristic of cetasikas.
The Fifty-Two Mental Factors
The Ethically Variable Factors—13
(annasamanacetasika)
`78
§2 The Universals —7
|2.2
How? I. (1) Contact, (2)feeling, (3)perception, (4)volition, (5)one-pointedness, (6)mental life faculty, and (7)attention: these seven mental factors are termed universals, i.e. common to every consciousness.
|
Guide to § 2
The fifty-two mental factors: The Abhidhamma philosophy recognizes fifty-two cetasikas, which are classified into four broad categories, as may be seen in Table 2.1:
(1)seven universals;
(2)six occasionals;
(3)fourteen unwholesome factors; and
(4)twenty-five beautiful factors.
The ethically variable factors (annasamanacetasika): The first two
categories of mental factors—the seven universals and the six
occasional—are united under the designation anhasamana, freely ren-
dered here as “ethically variable.” The expression literally means ^com-
mon to the other.” The non-beautiful cittas are called “other” (anna) in
relation to the beautiful cittas, and the beautiful cittas are called “other”
in relation to the non-beautiful cittas. The thirteen cetasikas of the first
two categories are common (samcina) to both beautiful and non-beauti-
ful cirtas, and assume the ethical quality imparted to the citta by the other
cetasikas, particularly the associated roots (hetu). In wholesome cittas
they become wholesome, in unwholesome cittas they become unwhole-
some, and in kammically indeterminate cittas they become kammically
indeterminate. For this reason they are called “common to the other, ” that is, ethically variable.
The universals {sabbacittasadharana): The seven universals are the
cetasikas common (sadharana) to all consciousness (sabbacitta). These
factors perform the most rudimentary and essential cognitive functions,
without which consciousness of an object would be utterly impossible.
(1) Contact (phassa): The word phassa is derived from the verb
phusati, meaning “to touch, ” but contact should not be understood as
the mere physical impact of the object on the bodily faculty. It is, rather,
the mental factor by which consciousness mentally “touches” the ob-
ject that has appeared, thereby initiating the entire cognitive event. In
terms of the fourfold defining device used in the Pali Commentaries,4
contact has the characteristic of touching. Its function is impingement,
as it causes consciousness and the object to impinge. Its manifestation
is the concurrence of consciousness, sense faculty, and object. Its proxi-
mate cause is an objective field that has come into focus.5
`79
TABLE 2.1:
THE 52 MENTAL FACTORS AT A GLANCE
Ethically Variables—13
Universals—7
(1)Contact
(2)Feeling
(3)Perception
(4)Volition
(5)One-pointedness
(6)Life faculty
(7)Attention
Occasional—6
(8)Initial application
(9)Sustained application
(10)Decision
(11)Energy
(12)Zest
(13)Desire
Unwholesome Factors—14
Unwholesome Universals—4
(14)Delusion
(15)Shamelessness
(16)Fearlessness of wrong
(17)Restlessness
Unwholesome Occasionals—10
(18)Greed
(19)Wrong view
(20)Conceit
(21)Hatred
(22)Envy
(23)Avarice
(24)Worry
(25)Sloth
(26)Torpor
(27)Doubt
Beautiful Factors—25
Beautiful Universals—19
(28)Faith
(29)Mindfulness
(30)Shame
(31)Fear of wrong
(32)Non-greed
(33)Non-hatred
(34)Neutrality of mind
(35)Tranquillity of mental body
(36)Tranquillity of consciousness
(37)Lightness of mental body
(38)Lightness of consciousness
(39)Malleability of mental body
(40)Malleability of consciousness
(41)Wieldiness of mental body
(42)Wieldiness of consciousness
(43)Proficiency of mental body
(44)Proficiency of consciousness
(45)Rectitude of mental body
(46)Rectitude of consciousness
Abstinences—3
(47)Right speech
(48)Right action
(49)Right livelihood
Illimitables—2
(50)Compassion
(51)Appreciative joy
Non-Delusion—1
(52)Wisdom faculty
`80
(2)Feeling (vedana): Feeling is the mental factor that feels the ob-
ject: it is the affective mode in which the object is experienced. The Pali
word vedanci does not signify emotion (which appears to be a complex
phenomenon involving a variety of concomitant mental factors), but the
bare affective quality of an experience, which may be either pleasant,
painful or neutral. Feeling is said to have the characteristic of being felt
{ye day it a). Its function is experiencing, or its function is to enjoy the
desirable aspect of the object. Its manifestation is the relishing of the
associated mental factors. Its proximate cause is tranquillity.6 Whereas
the other mental factors experience the object only derivatively, feeling
experiences it directly and fully. In this respect, the other factors are
compared to a cook who prepares a dish for a king and only samples
the food while preparing it, while feeling is compared to the king who
enjoys the meal as much as he likes.
(3)Perception (saññā): The characteristic of perception is the per-
ceiving of the qualities of the object. Its function is to make a sign as a
condition for perceiving again that “this is the same,” or its function is
recognizing what has been previously perceived. It becomes manifest
as the interpreting of the object (abhinivesa) by way of the features that
had been apprehended. Its proximate cause is the object as it appears.
Its procedure is compared to a carpenter’s recognition of certain kinds
of wood by the mark he has made on each.
(4)Volition (cetana): Cetana, from the same root as citta, is the men-
tal factor that is concerned with the actualization of a goal, that is, the
conative or volitional aspect of cognition. Thus it is rendered volition.
The Commentaries explain that cetana organizes its associated mental
factors in acting upon the object. Its characteristic is the state of will-
ing, its function is to accumulate (kamma), and its manifestation is co-
ordination. Its proximate cause is the associated states. Just as a chief
pupil recites his own lesson and also makes the other pupils recite their
lessons, so when volition starts to work on its object, it sets the associ-
ated states to do their own tasks as well. Volition is the most signifi-
cant mental factor in generating kamma, since it is volition that
determines the ethical quality of the action.
(5) One-pointedness (ekaggata): This is the unification of the mind
on its object. Although this factor comes to prominence in the jhanas,
where it functions as a jhana factor, the Abhidhamma teaches that the
germ of that capacity for mental unification is present in all types of
consciousness, even the most rudimentary. It there functions as the factor
which fixes the mind on its object. One-pointedness has non-wandering
or non-distraction as its characteristic. Its function is to conglomerate
or unite the associated states. It is manifested as peace, and its proximate
cause is happiness.7
`81
(6)	Mental life faculty (jīvitindriya): There are two kinds of life fac-
ulty, the mental, which vitalizes the associated mental states, and the
physical, which vitalizes material phenomena. The mental life faculty
alone is intended as a cetasika. It has the characteristic of maintaining
the associated mental states, the function of making them occur, mani-
festation as the establishing of their presence, and its proximate cause
is the mental states to be maintained.
(7)	Attention (manasikāra): The Pali word literally means “making
in the mind.” Attention is the mental factor responsible for the mind’s
advertence to the object, by virtue of which the object is made present
to consciousness. Its characteristic is the conducting (sarana) of the
associated mental states towards the object. Its function is to yoke the
associated states to the object. It is manifested as confrontation with an
object, and its proximate cause is the object. Attention is like the rud-
der of a ship, which directs it to its destination, or like a charioteer who
sends the well-trained horses (i.e. the associated states) towards their des-
tination (the object). Manasikara should be distinguished from vitakka:
while the former turns its concomitants towards the object, the latter
applies them onto the object. Manasikara is an indispensable cognitive
factor present in all states of consciousness; vitakka is a specialized factor
which is not indispensable to cognition.
§3 The Occasionals (pakinnaka)—6
|2.3
II. (1) Initial application, (2) sustained application, (3) decision, (4) energy, (5) zest, and (6) desire: these six mental factors are termed occasionals.
|2.4
Thus these thirteen mental factors should be understood as the ethically variables.
|
Guide to § 3
The occasionals (pakinnaka): The six cetasikas in this group are simi-
lar to the universals in being ethically variable factors, which take on
the moral quality of the citta as determined by other concomitants. They
differ from the universals in that they are found only in particular types
of consciousness, not in all.
(1) Initial application {vitakka): Vitakka was already introduced in
the discussion of the jhanas, where it appears as the first of the five jhana
`82
factors.8 Vitakka is the application of the mind to the object. Its charac-
teristic is the directing of the mind onto the object.9 Its function is to
strike at and thresh the object. It is manifested as the leading of the mind
onto an object. Though no proximate cause is mentioned in the Commen-
taries, the object may be understood as its proximate cause.
Ordinary vitakka simply applies the mind to the object. But when
vitcikka is cultivated through concentration it becomes a factor of jhana.
It is then termed cippanci, the absorption of the mind in the object. Vitakka
is also called sankcippa, intention, and as such is distinguished as miccha-
sankappa or wrong intention and sammcisankappa or right intention. The
latter is the second factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.
(2)	Sustained application (vicara): Vicara, also a jhana factor, has
the characteristic of continued pressure on the object,10 in the sense of
examining it. Its function is sustained application of the associated mental
phenomena to the object. It is manifested as the anchoring of those phe-
nomena in the object. The object may be understood to be its proximate
cause. The difference between vitakka and vicara has been discussed
above (p. 56).
(3)	Decision (adhimokkha): The word adhimokkha means literally
the releasing of the mind onto the object. Hence it has been rendered
decision or resolution. It has the characteristic of conviction, the func-
tion of not groping, and manifestation as decisiveness. Its proximate cause
is a thing to be convinced about. It is compared to a stone pillar owing
to its unshakable resolve regarding the object.
(4)	Energy {viriya): Viriya is the state or action of one who is vigor-
ous. Its characteristic is supporting, exertion, and marshalling. Its func-
tion is to support its associated states. Its manifestation is non-collapse.
Its proximate cause is a sense of urgency (samvega) or a ground for
arousing energy, that is, anything that stirs one to vigorous action. Just
as new timbers added to an old house prevent it from collapsing, or just
as a strong reinforcement enables the king’s army to defeat the enemy,
so energy upholds and supports all the associated states and does not
allow them to recede.
(5)	Zest (piti): Already introduced among the jhana factors, piti has
the characteristic of endearing (scimpiyayana). Its function is to refresh
mind and body, or its function is to pervade (to thrill with rapture). It is
manifested as elation. Mind-and-body (namarupa) is its proximate cause.
(6)	Desire (chanda): Chanda here means desire to act {kattu-kamata),
that is, to perform an action or achieve some result. This kind of desire
must be distinguished from desire in the reprehensible sense, that is, from
lobha, greed, and raga, lust.11 Whereas the latter terms are invariably un-
wholesome, chanda is an ethically variable factor which, when conjoined
with wholesome concomitants, can function as the virtuous desire to
achieve a worthy goal. The characteristic of chanda is desire to act, its
function is searching for an object, its manifestation is need for an ob-
ject, and that same object is its proximate cause. It should be regarded
as the stretching forth of the mind’s hand towards the object.
§4 The Unwholesome Factors—14
|2.5
III. (1) Delusion, (2) shamelessness, (3) fearlessness of wrong-doing, (4) restlessness, (5) greed, (6) wrong view, (7) conceit, (8) hatred, (9) envy, (10) avarice, (11) worry, (12) sloth, (13) torpor, and (14) doubt: these fourteen mental factors are termed the unwholesome.
|
Guide to §4
(1) Delusion (moha): Moha is a synonym for avijja, ignorance. Its
characteristic is mental blindness or unknowing (annana). Its function
is non-penetration, or concealment of the real nature of the object. It is
manifested as the absence of right understanding or as mental darkness.
Its proximate cause is unwise attention (ayoniso manasikara). It should
be seen as the root of all that is unwholesome.
(2, 3) Shamelessness (ahirika) and fearlessness of wrongdoing
(anottappa): The characteristic of shamelessness is the absence of dis-
gust at bodily and verbal misconduct; the characteristic of fearlessness
of wrongdoing (or moral recklessness) is absence of dread on account
of such misconduct. Both have the function of doing evil things. They
are manifest as not shrinking away from evil. Their proximate cause is
the lack of respect for self and lack of respect for others, respectively.12
(4)	Restlessness (uddhacca): Restlessness (or agitation) has the char-
acteristic of disquietude, like water whipped up by the wind. Its func-
tion is to make the mind unsteady, as wind makes a banner ripple. It is
manifested as turmoil. Its proximate cause is unwise attention to mental disquiet.
(5)	Greed (lobha): Greed, the first unwholesome root, covers all degrees of selfish desire, longing, attachment, and clinging. Its characteristic
`84
is grasping an object. Its function is sticking, as meat sticks to a hot pan.
It is manifested as not giving up. Its proximate cause is seeing enjoy-
ment in things that lead to bondage.
(6)	Wrong view (ditthi): Ditthi here means seeing wrongly. Its
characteristic is unwise (unjustified) interpretation of things. Its function
is to preassume. It is manifested as a wrong interpretation or belief. Its
proximate cause is unwillingness to see the noble ones (ariya), and so on.13
(7)	Conceit (mana): Conceit has the characteristic of haughtiness.
Its function is self-exaltation. It is manifested as vainglory.14 Its proxi-
mate cause is greed dissociated from views.15 It should be regarded as
madness.
(8)	Hatred (dosa): Dosa, the second unwholesome root, comprises
all kinds and degrees of aversion, ill will, anger, irritation, annoyance,
and animosity. Its characteristic is ferocity. Its function is to spread, or
to burn up its own support, i.e. the mind and body in which it arises. It
is manifestated as persecuting, and its proximate cause is a ground for
annoyance.16
(9)	Envy (issa): Envy has the characteristic of being jealous of
other’s success. Its function is to be dissatisfied with others’ success. It
is manifested as aversion towards that. Its proximate cause is others’ suc-
cess.
(10)	Avarice (macchariya): The characteristic of avarice (or stingi-
ness) is concealing one’s own success when it has been or can be ob-
tained. Its function is not to bear sharing these with others. It is manifest
as shrinking away (from sharing) and as meanness or sour feeling. Its
proximate cause is one’s own success.
(11)	Worry (kukkucca): Kukkucca is worry or remorse after having
done wrong. Its characteristic is subsequent regret. Its function is to
sorrow over what has and what has not been done. It is manifested as
remorse. Its proximate cause is what has and what has not been done
(i.e. wrongs of commission and omission).
(12)	Sloth (thina): Sloth is sluggishness or dullness of mind. Its char-
acteristic is lack of driving power. Its function is to dispel energy. It is
manifested as the sinking of the mind. Its proximate cause is unwise
attention to boredom, drowsiness, etc.
(13)	Torpor (middlia): Torpor is the morbid state of the mental fac-
tors. Its characteristic is unwieldiness. Its function is to smother. It is
manifested as drooping, or as nodding and sleepiness. Its proximate cause
is the same as that of sloth.
Sloth and torpor always occur in conjunction, and are opposed to
energy (viriya). Sloth is identified as sickness of consciousness (citta-
gelanna), torpor as sickness of the mental factors (kayagelanfia). As a
`85
pair they constitute one of the five hindrances, which is overcome by
initial application (vitakka).
(14) Doubt {vicikiccha): Doubt here signifies spiritual doubt, from
a Buddhist perspective the inability to place confidence in the Buddha,
the Dhamma, the Sangha, and the training. Its characteristic is doubt-
ing. Its function is to waver. It is manifested as indecisiveness and as
taking various sides. Its proximate cause is unwise attention.
The Beautiful Factors—25
(sobhanacetasika)
§5 The Universal Beautiful Factors (sobhanasadharana)—19
|2.6
IV. (1) Faith, (2) mindfulness, (3) shame, (4) fear of wrongdoing, (5) non-greed, (6) non-hatred, (7) neutrality of mind, (8) tranquillity of the (mental) body, (9) tranquillity of consciousness, (10) lightness of the (mental) body, （11) lightness of consciousness, (12) malleability of the (mental) body, (13) malleability of consciousness, (14)wieldiness of the (mental) body, (15) wieldiness of consciousness, (16) proficiency of the (mental) body, (17) proficiency of consciousness, (18) rectitude of the (mental) body, and (19) rectitude of consciousness: these nineteen mental factors are termed the universal beautiful factors.
|
Guide to §5
The universal beautiful factors (sobhanasadharana): The beauti-
ful mental factors are subdivided into four groups. First come the uni-
versal beautiful factors, nineteen cetasikas that are invariably present in
all beautiful consciousness. Following this come three groups of beau-
tiful cetasikas which are variable adjuncts not necessarily contained in
beautiful consciousness.
(1) Faith (saddha): The first of the beautiful cetasikas is faith, which
has the characteristic of placing faith or of trusting. Its function is to
clarify, as a water-clearing gem causes muddy water to become clear;
`86
or its function is to set forth, as one might set forth to cross a flood.17 It
is manifested as non-fogginess, i.e. the removal of the mind’s impuri-
ties, or as resolution. Its proximate cause is something to place faith in,
or the hearing of the Good Dhamma, etc., that constitute the factors of
stream-entry.
(2) Mindfulness (sati): The word sati derives from a root meaning
“to remember,” but as a mental factor it signifies presence of mind, atten-
tiveness to the present, rather than the faculty of memory regarding the
past. It has the characteristic of not wobbling, i.e. not floating away from
the object.18 Its function is absence of confusion or non-forgetfulness.
It is manifested as guardianship, or as the state of confronting an objec-
tive field. Its proximate cause is strong perception {thirasafina) or the
four foundations of mindfulness (see VII, §24).
(3, 4) Shame (hiri) and fear of wrongdoing (ottappa): Shame has
the characteristic of disgust at bodily and verbal misconduct, fear of
wrongdoing has the characteristic of dread in regard to such miscon-
duct. They both have the function of not doing evil, and are manifested
as the shrinking away from evil. Their proximate cause is respect for
self and respect for others, respectively. These two states are called by
the Buddha the guardians of the world because they protect the world
from falling into widespread immorality.
(5) Non-greed (alobha): Non-greed has the characteristic of the
mind’s lack of desire for its object, or non-adherence to the object like
a drop of water on a lotus leaf. Its function is not to lay hold, and its
manifestation is detachment. It should be understood that non-greed is
not the mere absence of greed, but the presence of positive virtues such
as generosity and renunciation as well.
(6)	Non-hatred (adosa): Non-hatred has the characteristic of lack of
ferocity, or of non-opposing. Its function is to remove annoyance, or to
remove fever, and its manifestation is agreeableness. Non-hatred com-
prises such positive virtues as loving-kindness, gentleness, amity, friend-
liness, etc.
When non-hatred appears as the sublime quality of loving-kindness
(metta) it has the characteristic of promoting the welfare of living beings.
Its function is to prefer their welfare. Its manifestation is the removal of
ill will. Its proximate cause is seeing beings as lovable. Such loving-
kindness must be distinguished from selfish affection, its “near enemy.”
(7)	Neutrality of mind {tatramajjhattata): The Pali term for this
cetasika literally means “there in the middleness.” It is a synonym for
equanimity (upekkha), not as neutral feeling, but as a mental attitude of
balance, detachment, and impartiality. It has the characteristic of con-
veying consciousness and the mental factors evenly. Its function is to
`87
prevent deficiency and excess, or to prevent partiality. It is manifested
as neutrality. It should be seen as the state of looking on with equanim-
ity in the citta and cetasikas, like a charioteer who looks on with equa-
nimity at the thoroughbreds progressing evenly along the roadway.
Neutrality of mind becomes the sublime quality of equanimity towards
living beings. As such it treats beings free from discrimination, without
preferences and prejudices, looking upon all as equal. This equanimity
should not be confused with its “near enemy, ” the worldly-minded in-
difference due to ignorance.
The next twelve universal beautiful cetasikas fall into six pairs, each
containing one term that extends to the “mental body” (kaya) and an-
other that extends to consciousness (citta). In this context the mental
body is the collection of associated cetasikas, called “body” in the sense
of an aggregation.
(8,9) Tranquillity (passaddhi): The twofold tranquillity has the char-
acteristic of the quieting down of disturbances (daratha) in the mental
body and consciousness, respectively. Its function is to crush such distur-
bances. It is manifested as peacefulness and coolness. Its proximate cause
is the mental body and consciousness. It should be regarded as opposed
to such defilements as restlessness and worry, which create distress.
(10, 11) Lightness (lahuta): The twofold lightness has the charac-
teristic of the subsiding of heaviness (garubhava) in the mental body
and consciousness. It should be regarded as opposed to such defilements
as sloth and torpor, which create heaviness.
(12, 13) Malleability (muduta): The twofold malleability has the
characteristic of the subsiding of rigidity (thambhci) in the mental body
and consciousness, respectively. Its function is to crush rigidity. It is
manifested as non-resistance, and its proximate cause is the mental body
and consciousness. It should be regarded as opposed to such defilements
as wrong views and conceit, which create rigidity.
(14, 15) Wieldiness (kammannata): The twofold wieldiness has the
characteristic of the subsiding of unwieldiness {akammannabhava) in the
mental body and consciousness, respectively. Its function is to crush
unwieldiness. It is manifested as success of the mental body and con-
sciousness in making something an object. Its proximate cause is the
mental body and consciousness. It should be regarded as opposed to the
remaining hindrances, which create unwieldiness of the mental body and
consciousness.
(16, 17) Proficiency (pagunnata): The twofold proficiency has the char-
acteristic of healthiness of the mental body and consciousness, respectively.
`88
Its function is to crush unhealthiness of the mental body and conscious-
ness. It is manifested as absence of disability. Its proximate cause is the
mental body and consciousness. It should be regarded as opposed to lack
of faith, etc., which cause unhealthiness of the mental body and con-
sciousness.
(18, 19) Rectitude (ujjukata): Rectitude is straightness. The twofold
rectitude has the characteristic of uprightness of the mental body and
consciousness, respectively. Its function is to crush tortuousness of the
mental body and consciousness, and its manifestation is non-crooked-
ness. Its proximate cause is the mental body and consciousness. It should
be regarded as opposed to hypocrisy and fraudulence, etc., which cre-
ate crookedness in the mental body and consciousness.
§6 The Abstinences (virati)—3
|2.7
V. (1) Right speech, (2) right action, and (3) right livelihood: these three are termed abstinences.
|
Guide to § 6
The abstinences: The viratis are three beautiful mental factors which
are responsible for the deliberate abstinence from wrong conduct by way
of speech, action, and livelihood. In mundane consciousness, the viratis
are operative only on an occasion when one intentionally refrains from
a wrong mode of conduct for which an opportunity has arisen. When a
person refrains from evil deeds without an opportunity for their perform-
ance arising, this is not a case of virati but of pure moral conduct (sTla).
The commentators distinguish three types of virati: (1) natural absti-
nence; (2) abstinence by undertaking precepts; and (3) abstinence by
eradication.19
(1)	Natural abstinence (sampattavirciti) is the abstinence from evil
deeds when the opportunity arises to engage in them, due to the consid-
eration of one’s social position, age, level of education, etc. An exam-
ple is refraining fom theft out of concern that one’s reputation would
be hurt if one is caught.
(2)	Abstinence by undertaking precepts {samadcinavirati) is the ab-
stinence from evil deeds because one has undertaken to observe precepts,
for example, the Five Precepts of abstaining from killing, stealing, sexual
misconduct, false speech, and intoxicants.
`89
(3) Abstinence by eradication (samucchedavirati) is the abstinence
associated with the supramundane path consciousness, which arises eradi-
cating the dispositions towards evil deeds. Whereas the previous two
viratis are mundane, this one is supramundane.
The viratis comprise three distinct mental factors mentioned in the
text: right speech, right action, and right livelihood.
(1)	Right speech (sammavaca): Right speech is the deliberate absti-
nence from wrong speech: from false speech, slander, harsh speech, and
frivolous talk.
(2)	Right action (sammakammanta): Right action is the deliberate
abstinence from wrong bodily action: from killing, stealing, and sexual
misconduct.
(3)	Right livelihood (samma-ajiva): Right livelihood is the deliber-
ate abstinence from wrong livelihood, such as dealing in poisons, in-
toxicants, weapons, slaves, or animals for slaughter.
The three viratis have the respective characteristics of non-transgres-
sion by bodily misconduct, by wrong speech, and by wrong livelihood.
Their function is to shrink back from evil deeds. They are manifested
as the abstinence from such deeds. Their proximate causes are the spe-
cial qualities of faith, shame, fear of wrongdoing, fewness of wishes,
etc. They should be regarded as the mind's aversion to wrongdoing.
§7 The lllimitables (appamaññā)—2
|2.8
VI. (1) Compassion, (2) appreciative joy: these are termed illimitables.
VII. Together with the faculty of wisdom these twenty-five, in all, are to be understood as beautiful mental factors.
|
Guide to § 7
The illimitables: There are four attitudes towards living beings called
the illimitables (or immeasurables) because they are to be developed to-
wards all living beings and thus have a potentially limitless range. The
four illimitable states are loving-kindness (metta), compassion {karimci),
appreciative joy (muditci), and equanimity {upekkha). These four are also
called brahmaviharas, “divine abodes” or sublime states.
Although four illimitables are recognized as ideal attitudes towards
beings, only two—compassion and appreciative joy—are included as
cetasikas under the heading of the illimitables. This is because loving-
kindness, as we have seen, is a mode of the cetasika adosa, non-hatred,
and equanimity is a mode of the cetasika tatramajjhattata, neutrality of
`90
mind. Non-hatred does not necessarily manifest as loving-kindness; it
can appear in other modes as well. But when loving-kindness does arise
in the mind, it does so as a manifestation of the cetasika non-hatred. A
similar relationship holds between the cetasika neutrality of mind and
the sublime state of equanimity as impartiality towards living beings.
The two illimitables that appear as mental factors in their own right,
not as manifestations of other mental factors, are compassion and appre-
ciative joy. Whereas non-hatred and mental neutrality—the factors
underlying loving-kindness and equanimity—are present in all beauti-
ful cittas, these two are present only on occasions when their functions
are individually exercised.
(1)	Compassion: Karuna, or compassion, has the characteristic of
promoting the removal of suffering in others. Its function is not being
able to bear others, suffering. It is manifested as non-cruelty. Its proxi-
mate cause is seeing helplessness in those overwhelmed by suffering. It
succeeds when it causes cruelty to subside, and it fails when it produces
sorrow.
(2)	Appreciative joy: Mudita, or appreciative joy, has the charac-
teristic of gladness at the success of others. Its function is being unenvious
at others’ success. It is manifested as the elimination of aversion. Its
proximate cause is seeing the success of others. It succeeds when it causes
aversion to subside, and it fails when it produces merriment.
§8 Non-Delusion (amoha)—1
Guide to §8
The wisdom faculty: Pahna is wisdom, or knowing things as they
really are. It is here called a faculty because it exercises predominance
in comprehending things as they really are. In the Abhidhamma, the three
terms—wisdom (paiina), knowledge {nana), and non-delusion
(amoha)—are used synonymously. Wisdom has the characteristic of
penetrating things according to their intrinsic nature (yathasa-
bliavapativedha). Its function is to illuminate the objective field like a
lamp. It is manifested as non-bewilderment. Its proximate cause is wise
attention (yoniso manasikara).
`91
§9 Summary
|2.9
Thus:
Thirteen are ethically variable, and fourteen are unwholesome.
Twenty-five are beautiful. Thus fifty-two have been enumerated.
|
Association of Mental Factors —16
§10 Introductory Verse
|2.10
In the following we will explain, in the appropriate ways, the association of each of these mental adjuncts with the different states of consciousness.
|2.11
Seven are linked with every type of consciousness. The occasionals are linked in the appropriate ways. Fourteen are linked only with the unwholesome types, and the beautiful factors only with the beautiful types (of consciousness).
|
The Ethically Variable Factors—7
§11 Analysis
`92
TABLE 2.2: ASSOCIATION OF MENTAL FACTORS
Cetasika	Cittas	Total
Variables		
Universals	All cittas	89, 121
Initial application	1-12, 18, 19, 25-54, 55, 60, 65, 82, 	
	87, 92, 97, 102, 107, 112, 117	55
Sustained application	Same + 56, 61, 66, 83, 88, 93, 98, 	
	103, 108, 113, 118	66
Decision	1-10, 12, 18, 19, 25-89 (or: 25-121)	78, 110
Energy	1-12, 29-89 (or: 29-121)	73, 105
Zest	1-4, 26, 30, 31-34, 39-42, 47-50, 	
	55-57, 60-62, 65-67, 82-84, 87-89,	
	92-94, 97-99, 102-104, 107-109, 	
	112-114, 117-119	51
Desire	1-10, 31-89 (or: 31-121)	69, 101
Unwholesome		
Unwh. universals	1-12	12
Greed	1-8	8
Wrong view	1, 2, 5, 6	4
Conceit	3, 4, 7’ 8	4
Hatred, envy, avarice,		
worry	9, 10	2
Sloth, torpor	2, 4, 6, 8, 10	5
Doubt	11	1
Beautiful		
Btf. universals	31-89 (or: 31-121)	59, 91
Abstinences	31-38’ 82-89 (or: 82-121)	16, 48
Illimitables	31-38, 47-54, 55-58, 60-63, 65-68	28
Wisdom	31, 32, 35, 36, 39, 40, 43, 44, 47, 	
	48, 51, 52, 55-89 (or: 55-121)	47, 79
Unfixed adjuncts = 11		
Envy, avarice, worry 3	separately and occasionally	
Abstinences	3 "	"	" (mundane)
Abstinences	3	conjoined always	(supramundane)
Illimitables	2	separately and occasionally
Conceit	1	occasionally
Sloth, torpor	2	conjoined and occasionally
Fixed adjuncts = remaining 41


`93
|2.12
In what way?
(i)	In the first place, the seven universal mental factors are found in all the eighty-nine types of consciousness.
Among the particular mental factors:
|2.13
(ii)Initial application arises in fifty-five types of consciousness:
in all types of sense-sphere consciousness except the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness (54 - 10 = 44); and also in the eleven types
of first jhana consciousness (44 +11= 55).
|2.14
(iii)Sustained application arises in sixty-six types of consciousness: in those fifty-five and in the eleven types of second jhana consciousness (55 + 11= 66).
|2.15
Decision arises in all types of consciousness excluding the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness and consciousness accompanied by doubt (89 - 11= 78).
|2.16
(v)Energy arises in all types of consciousness excluding the five sense-door adverting consciousness, the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, receiving consciousness, and investigating consciousness (89 - 16 = 73).
|2.17
(vi)Zest arises in all types of consciousness excluding those accompanied by displeasure and equanimity, body-consciousness, and the fourth jhana consciousness (121 -(2 + 55 + 2+ 11) = 51).
|2.18
(vii)Desire arises in all types of consciousness excluding the rootless and the two types of consciousness accompanied by delusion (89-20 = 69).
|
Guide to § 11
Initial application: The two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, being the most rudimentary types of citta, do not contain any cetasikas with more complex functions to perform than the seven universal mental factors.
Vitakka is excluded from these cittas because of their elementary nature, and from all sublime and supramundane cittas above the level
`94
of the first jhana because it has been overcome by meditative development. On the eleven types of first jhana consciousness, see I, §32 and Guide.
Sustained application is present in the second jhana consciousness,
but is excluded from all higher jhanas.
Decision is excluded from the doubting consciousness because a
decision cannot be made while the mind is obstructed by doubt.
Energy is excluded from the five-door adverting consciousness, the
two kinds of receiving consciousness, and the three kinds of investigat-
ing consciousness (see I, §§8-10) because these cittas are still of a rela-
tively weak and passive nature.
Zest is always accompanied by joyful feeling (somanassa), but the
cittas of the fourth jhana contain joyful feeling without zest.
Desire here is desire to act, to achieve a purpose, and the two cittas
rooted in delusion are so dense that they exclude purposeful action.
§12 Summary
|2.19
Those types of consciousness in order are:
Sixty-six, fifty-five, eleven, sixteen, seventy, and twenty without the occasionals.
Fifty-five, sixty-six, seventy-eight, seventy-three, fifty-one, and sixty-nine with the occasionals.
|
Guide to §12
The first line of the summary cites the number of cittas without each
of the six occasionals, the second line cites the number with the same
occasionals. It should be noted, by adding the two figures, that the 121-
fold scheme has been used when the jhanic levels of the path and frui-
tion cittas are relevant to the computation, the 89-fold scheme when such
distinctions are irrelevant. For example, initial application is present in
fifty-five cittas and absent in sixty-six on the 121-fold scheme, while
decision is present in seventy-eight cittas and absent in eleven on the
89-fold scheme.
`95
The Unwholesome Factors—5
§13 Analysis
|2.20
Of the unwholesome mental factors, these four factors—delusion, shamelessness, fearlessness of wrongdoing, and restlessness—are called universal unwholesome factors. They are found in
all twelve unwholesome types of consciousness.
|2.21
Greed is found only in the eight types of consciousness accompanied by greed.
|2.22
Wrong view arises in the four types of (greed-rooted) consciousness associated with wrong view.
|2.23
Conceit is found in the four types of (greed-rooted) consciousness dissociated from wrong view.
|2.24
Hatred, envy, avarice, and worry are found in the two types of consciousness associated with aversion.
|2.25
Sloth and torpor are found in the five types of prompted consciousness.
|2.26
Doubt is found only in the type of consciousness associated with doubt.
|
Guide to §13
Universal unwholesome factors: These four factors occur in all
twelve unwholesome cittas, for every unwholesome citta involves a
mental blindness to the danger in evil (i.e. delusion), a lack of shame
and moral dread, and an underlying current of agitation (i.e. restlessness).
Wrong view, conceit: Both of these factors are found only in the
cittas rooted in greed, for they involve some degree of holding to the
`96
five aggregates. However, the two exhibit contrary qualities, and thus
they cannot coexist in the same citta. Wrong view occurs in the mode
of misapprehending, i.e. interpreting things in a manner contrary to
actuality; conceit occurs in the mode of self-evaluation, i.e. of taking
oneself to be superior, equal, or inferior to others. Whereas wrong view
is necessarily present in the four cittas rooted in greed accompanied by
wrong view, conceit is not a necessary concomitant of the four greed-
rooted cittas dissociated from wrong view. It does not arise apart from
these cittas, but these cittas can occur without conceit.
Hatred, envy, avarice, worry: These four factors occur only in the
cittas associated with aversion. Hatred, being a synonym for aversion,
is necessarily found in these two cittas; the other three factors occur
variably, depending on conditions. All three partake in the characteris-
tic of aversion: envy involves resentment against the success of others;
avarice involves resistance to sharing one’s belongings with others; worry
here means remorse—self-recrimination for one’s commissions and
omissions.
Sloth and torpor: These two factors make the cittas dull and slug-
gish. Hence they cannot arise in the unprompted cittas, which are natu-
rally keen and active, but only in the prompted unwholesome cittas.
§14 Summary
|2.27
Four are found in all unwholesome states, three in those rooted in greed, four in those rooted in hatred, and so are two in the prompted.
Doubt is found in the consciousness accompanied by doubt. 
Thus the fourteen (factors) are conjoined only with the twelve unwholesome (types of consciousness) in five ways.

The Beautiful Factors—4
§15 Analysis
|2.28
Of the beautiful, firstly, the nineteen universal beautiful factors are found in all the fifty-nine types of beautiful consciousness.
|2.29
The three abstinences are necessarily found together in their entirety in every supramundane type of consciousness.
But in the mundane sense-sphere wholesome types of consciousness they are only sometimes present (and then) separately (8 + 8 = 16).
|2.30
The illimitables arise at times variably in twenty-eight types of consciousness—namely, the twelve sublime types of consciousness excluding the fifth jhana, the (eight types of) sense-sphere wholesome consciousness, and the (eight types of) sense-sphere functional consciousness with roots (12 + 8 + 8 = 28). 
Some, however, say that compassion and appreciative joy are not present in the types of consciousness accompanied by equanimity.
|2.31
Wisdom goes into combination with forty-seven types of consciousness—namely, the twelve types of sense-sphere consciousness associated with knowledge, and all the thirty-five sublime and supramundane types of consciousness (12 + 35 = 47).
|
Guide to §15
The three abstinences: In the supramundane path and fruition cittas,
the abstinences are always present together as the right speech, right
action, and right livelihood of the Noble Eightfold Path. But in mun-
dane cittas they are only present, as explained earlier, on occasions when
one deliberately refrains from wrongdoing. Since one deliberately re-
frains from an evil deed with a consciousness that is aware of the op-
portunity for transgression, the mundane abstinences can occur only in
the sense-sphere wholesome cittas; they cannot occur in sublime cittas, 
`99
which take the counterpart sign of the jhana as their object, nor do they
occur in resultant sense-sphere cittas, which do not exercise the func-
tion of restraint. They also do not occur in the great functional cittas of
an Arahant, since an Arahant has altogether overcome the disposition
towards transgression and thus has no need for abstinence.
In the supramundane cittas the three abstinences are necessarily
present (niyata). In the path cittas they are present as the three moral
factors of the eightfold path, performing the functions of eradicating the
inclinations to wrong speech, wrong action, and wrong livelihood respec-
tively. In the fruition cittas they reappear representing the moral purity
of speech, action, and livelihood accomplished by the work of the path.
Since transgressions in speech, action, and livelihood each have a
different sphere, in mundane consciousness the three abstinences are
mutually exclusive: if one is present, the other two must be absent.
Moreover, any abstinence that arises can arise only in part, as determined
by the type of transgression one refrains from: if one meets the oppor-
tunity to take life, then right action arises as abstinence only from tak-
ing life; if one meets the opportunity to steal, then it arises as abstinence
only from stealing. However, when the abstinences arise in the
supramundane cittas they always occur together (ekato), all three being
present simultaneously. And as present, each one functions in its entirety
(sabbatha); that is, right speech eliminates the dispositions to all forms
of wrong speech, right action to all forms of wrong action, and right
livelihood to all forms of wrong livelihood.
The illimitables: While non-hatred and mental neutrality—which can
also become the illimitables of loving-kindness and equanimity—are
present in all wholesome cittas, the other two illimitables—compassion
and appreciative joy—are only present when the citta occurs in the ap-
propriate mode: either as commiserating with those in suffering, when
compassion arises, or as rejoicing in the fortune of others, when appre-
ciative joy arises.
The twelve sublime types of consciousness here are the first four
jhanas in the three aspects of wholesome, resultant, and functional. These
two illimitables (as well as loving-kindness) do not arise in the fifth jhana
cittas because, at the level of jhana, they are necessarily connected to
joyful mental feeling (somanassa), which in the fifth jhana is replaced
by equanimous feeling (upekkha). Some teachers deny that the
illimitables are found in the sense-sphere cittas accompanied by equa-
nimity, but from the author’s use of the expression “some, however, say, ”
he apparently does not share their view.20
Wisdom: The character of wisdom varies in accordance with the types
of cittas in which it arises, but all beautiful cittas except the sense-sphere
`99
cittas dissociated from knowledge include some measure of right understanding.
§16 Summary
|2.32
Nineteen states arise in fifty-nine, three in sixteen, two in twenty-eight types of consciousness.
Wisdom is declared to be found in forty-seven types. Thus beautiful (factors) are found only in the beautiful (types of consciousness.
combined in four ways.

§17 Fixed and Unfixed Adjuncts
|2.33
Envy, avarice, worry, abstinences, compassion, etc. (i.e. appreciative joy), and conceit arise separately and occasionally. So do sloth and torpor, but in combination.
|2.34
The remaining factors, apart from those mentioned above (52 - 11 =41), are fixed adjuncts. Now I shall speak of their combination accordingly.
|
Guide to § 17
Of the fifty-two cetasikas, eleven are called unfixed adjuncts (aniyata-
yogi) because they do not necessarily arise in the types of conscious-
ness to which they are allied. The remaining forty-one factors are called
fixed adjuncts (niyatayogl) because they invariably arise in their assigned
types of consciousness.
In the sections to follow, Acariya Anuruddha will analyze each of the
121 cittas in terms of its constellation of associated cetasikas. This method
of analysis is called the sangahanaya, the method of combinations.
`100
Combinations of Mental Factors—33
(cetasikasangahanaya)
§18 Introductory Verse
|2.35
Thirty-six factors arise in the supramundane (consciousness), thirty-five in the sublime, thirty-eight in the sense-sphere beautiful.
Twenty-seven in the unwholesome, twelve in the rootless. According to the way they arise their combination therein is fivefold.

Supramundane Consciousness—5
§19 Analysis
|2.36
How?
(i)First, in the eight types of supramundane first jhana consciousness, thirty-six factors enter into combination, namely, thirteen ethically variables and twenty-three beautiful mental factors, excluding the two illimitables (13 + 23 = 36).
(ii)Similarly, in the supramundane second jhana types of consciousness, all the above are included except initial application (35).
(iii)In the third jhana types of consciousness (all those) excluding initial application and sustained application (34).
(iv)In the fourth jhana types of consciousness (all those) excluding initial application, sustained application, and zest (33).
|
`101
TABLE 2.3: COMBINATIONS OF MENTAL FACTORS
Citta	No.	Cetasikas	Total
Supramundane			
1 st jhana	8	1-13, 28-49, 52	36
2nd jhana	8	1-7, 9-13, 28-49, 52	35
3rd jhana	8	1-7, 10-13, 28-49, 52	234
4th jhana	8	1-7, 10, 11, 13, 28-49, 52	33
5th jhana	8	1-7, 10, 11, 13, 28-49, 52	33
Sublime			
1 st jhana	3	1-13, 28-46, 50-52	35
2nd jhana	3	1-7, 9-13, 28-46, 50-52	34
3rd jhana	3	1-7, 10-13, 28-46, 50-52	33
4th jhana	3	1-7, 10, 11, 13, 28-46, 50-52	32
5 th jhana	15	1-7, 10, 11, 13, 28-46, 52	30
SS Beautiful			
Wholesome	31, 32	1-13’ 28-52	38
it	33, 34	1-13’ 28-51	37
"	35, 36	1-11, 13, 28-52	37
	37, 38	1-11, 13, 28-51	36
Resultant	39, 40	1-13, 28-46, 52	33
"	41, 42	1-13’ 28-46	32
"	43, 44	1-11’ 13, 28-46, 52	32
•«	45, 46	1-11’ 13, 28-46	31
Functional	47. 48	1-13. 28-46. 50-52	35
•1	49, 50	1-13, 28-46, 50, 51	34
"	51, 52	1-11’ 13, 28-46, 50-52	34
•t	53, 54	1-11’ 13, 28-46, 50-51	33
Unwholesome			
Greed-rooted	1	1-19	19
••	2	1-19, 25, 26	21
••	3	1-18, 20	19
	4	1-18, 20, 25, 26	21
•1	5	1-11’ 13, 14-19	18
M	6	1-11, 13, 14-19, 25, 26	20
•1	7	1-11, 13, 14-18, 20	18
•1	8	1-11, 13, 14-18, 20, 25, 26	20
Hate-rooted	9	1-11, 13, 14-17, 21-24	20
M	10	1-11, 13, 14-17, 21-24, 25, 26	22
Delus.-rooted	11	1-9, 11, 14-17, 27	15
•i	12	1-11, 14-17	15
Rootless			
Sense consness.	13-17	1-7	7
«V IV	20-24	1-7	7
Receiving	18, 25	1-10	10
Investigating	19, 27	1-10	10
Investigating	26	1-10, 12	11
Five door-advt.	28	1-10	10
Mind-door-advt.	29	1-11	11
Smile-producing	30	1-12	12
`102
(v) In the fifth jhana types of consciousness, those (same factors
of the fourth jhana) are included accompanied by equanimity (instead
of happiness) (33).
Thus altogether, for the eight types of supramundane conscious-
ness, the combination is fivefold by way of the five kinds of jhana.
Guide to §19
Supramundane first jhana consciousness: On the supramundane
jhanas, see I, §§31-32.
Excluding the two illimitables: The illimitables of compassion and
appreciative joy are not found in the supramundane cittas because they
always take the concept of living beings as their object, while the path
and fruition cittas take Nibbana as their object.21 The exceptions in (ii)-
(V) should be understood by way of the elimination of the grosser jhana
factors at the different levels of supramundane jhana.
§20 Summary
|2.37
Respectively there are thirty-six, thirty-five, thirty-four, and thirty-three in the last two. Thus in five ways they exist in the supramundane.
|
Sublime Consciousness—5
§21 Analysis
`103
|2.38
(i)In the sublime types of consciousness, first in the three types of first jhana consciousness, thirty-five states enter into combination, namely, the thirteen ethically variable mental factors and twenty-two beautiful mental factors, excluding the three abstinences (13 + 22 = 35).
But here compassion and appreciative joy should be combined separately.
(ii)Similarly, in the second jhana consciousness (all those are included) except initial application (34).
(iii)In the third jhana consciousness, all except initial application and sustained application (33).
(iv)In the fourth jhana consciousness, all except initial application, sustained application, and zest (32).
(v)In the fifteen (types of) fifth jhana consciousness the illimitables are not obtained (30).
Thus altogether, for the twenty-seven types of sublime consciousness, the combination is fivefold by way of the five kinds of jhana.
|
Guide to §21
Three types of first jhana consciousness: that is, wholesome, resultant, and functional.
Excluding the three abstinences: The abstinences are not included
in the sublime consciousness because one who is absorbed in jhana is
not, at that time, deliberately refraining from some type of wrongdoing.
Compassion and appreciative joy should be combined separately:
Compassion takes as object beings who are afflicted by suffering, ap-
preciative joy takes as object beings who have achieved success and
happiness. Compassion occurs in the mode of commiseration, apprecia-
tive joy in the mode of rejoicing. Hence because of their contrary ob-
jects and modes of occurrence, the two cannot coexist in the same citta.
While one or the other may be associated with this consciousness, they
both may be absent.
§22 Summary
|2.39
There are respectively thirty-five, thirty-four, thirty-three, thirty-two, and thirty. Fivefold is the combination in the sublime.
|
`103
Sense-Sphere Beautiful Consciousness—12
§23 Analysis
|2.40
(i) In the sense-sphere beautiful types of consciousness, first in the wholesome types of consciousness, in the first couplet thirty-eight states enter into combination, namely, the thirteen ethically variable mental factors and the twenty-five beautiful mental factors (13 + 25 =38). 
But here the (two) illimitables and the (three) abstinences Sense-Sphere Beautiful Consciousness—12
(ii)Similarly in the second couplet, (all those are included) excluding knowledge (37).
(iii)In the third couplet, associated with knowledge, (all those are included) excluding zest (37).
(iv)	In the fourth couplet (all) those are included excluding knowledge and zest (36).
In the functional types of consciousness, in the four couplets those (mental factors) are included in the same four ways, except that the abstinences are excluded (35, 34, 34, 33).
So too, in the resultant types of consciousness, those (mental factors) are included except that the illimitables and the abstinences are excluded (33, 32, 32, 31).
Thus altogether, for the twenty-four sense-sphere beautiful types of consciousness, the combination is twelvefold by way of the couplets.
|
`105
Guide to §23
The first couplet: The couplets spoken of in this passage are the pairs
of prompted and unprompted cittas. These do not differ in their con-
stituency of cetasikas, and thus may be analyzed together.
The (three) abstinences should be combined separately: Because
the abstinences have different spheres of application—speech, action,
and livelihood—only one can occur in any given citta, as determined
by the kind of wrong deed one is intending to refrain from. Since the
abstinences only arise on occasions of deliberate restraint, they need not
be present in this type of consciousness.
Excluding zest: The third and fourth couplets are the cittas accom-
panied by equanimous feeling (upekkha); these exclude zest {piti), which
can occur only in connection with joyful feeling (somanassa).
Functional types of consciousness: Functional cittas of the beauti-
ful class arise only in Arahants. These cittas exclude the abstinences
because Arahants, having cut off all defilements, do not need to delib-
erately refrain from evil deeds.
Resultant types: Sense-sphere resultants exclude the illimitables
because they take solely sense-sphere phenomena as their object, while
the illimitables take the concept of beings as their object; they exclude
the abstinences because there is no refraining from wrong deeds on the
occasion of sense-sphere resultants.
§24 Summary
|2.41
With respect to sense-sphere consciousness with roots—wholesome, resultant, and functional—there arise in the wholesome (first pair) thirty-eight, twice thirty-seven (in the second and third pairs), and thirty-six (in the fourth pair). In the functional there are thirty-five (in the first pair), twice thirty-four (in the second and third pairs), and thirty-three (in the fourth pair). In the resultant there are thirty-three (in the first pair), twice thirty-two (in the second and third pairs), and thirty-one (in the fourth pair).
|
`106
§25 Distinctions among the Beautiful Types
|2.42
Herein, the abstinences are not found in the functional consciousness or the sublime consciousness, nor are the illimitables found in the supramundane, nor is the pair (the illimitables and abstinences) present in the sense-sphere resultants.
In the supreme (i.e. the supramundane) the jhana factors are the basis of distinctions, in the middle (i.e. the sublime) the illimitables (and jhana factors), and in the limited (i.e. the sense-sphere beautiful) the abstinences, knowledge, and zest are the basis of distinctions.
|
Guide to § 25
The Vibhavinl-Tika adds that in the "limited", or sense-sphere cittas
the illimitables (compassion and appreciative joy) are also a basis of
distinctions, since they distinguish the wholesome and functionals, in
which they may be found, from the resultants, from which they are nec-
essarily absent.
UnwholesomG Consciousness—7
§26 Analysis
`107
|2.43
(i)In the unwholesome types of consciousness, first in those rooted in greed, in the first unprompted consciousness nineteen states enter into combination, namely, the thirteen ethically variable mental factors and the four universal unwholesome mental factors, making seventeen, together with greed and wrong view (13 + 4 + 2 = 19).
|2.44
(ii)Similarly, in the second unprompted consciousness, (the same seventeen are found together) with greed and conceit (13+4+2 = 19).
|2.45
(iii)Similarly, in the third unprompted consciousness, there are eighteen states, together with greed and wrong view but excluding zest (12 + 4 + 2 = 18).
|2.46
(iv)Similarly, in the fourth (there are eighteen) with greed and conceit (12 + 4 + 2 = 18).
|2.47
(v)	In the fifth unprompted consciousness, that associated with
aversion, these twenty states enter into combination —the above ex-
cluding zest but including the four: hatred, envy, avarice, and worry.
But here envy, avarice and worry should be combined separately
(12 + 4 + 4 = 20).
|2.48
(vi)In the five types of prompted consciousness the above states should similarly be combined with this difference, that sloth and torpor are included. (Thus: 21; 21; 20; 20; 22.)
|2.49
(vii)In the type of consciousness connected with restlessness fifteen mental states occur, namely, eleven ethically variable factors excluding desire and zest, and the four universal unwholesome factors (11 + 4 = 15).
|2.50
(viii)In the type of consciousness connected with doubt fifteen states are similarly obtained by excluding decision and incorporating doubt (10 + 4 + 1 = 15).
Thus altogether, for the twelve types of unwholesome consciousness, the combination becomes sevenfold when reckoned according to their different adjuncts.
|
Guide to § 26
Those rooted in greed: The first and third unprompted cittas rooted in greed invariably include wrong view; the third, being accompanied
`108
by equanimity, excludes zest. The second and fourth may include con-
ceit, but not as a matter of necessity. Thus when conceit is absent they
will contain eighteen and seventeen cetasikas, respectively.
That associated with aversion: This type of citta includes twelve
ethically variable factors, four unwholesome universals, and the four
additional states of the aversion class—hatred, envy, avarice, and worry.
The last three are mutually exclusive and may all be absent from this
citta.
Connected with restlessness: The two cittas rooted in delusion ex-
clude desire, as they are incapable of sustaining purposive activity. In
the doubting consciousness, decision is replaced by doubt, the two be-
ing mutually incompatible.
§27 Summary
|2.51
Nineteen, eighteen, twenty, twenty-one, twenty, twenty-two, fifteen—thus they stand in seven ways in the unwholesome consciousness.
|2.52
These fourteen mental states—namely, the four unwholesome universals and ten variables—are said to be associated with all the unwholesome types of consciousness.
|
Rootless Consciousness4
§28 Analysis
`109
|2.53
(i)In the rootless types of consciousness, first in the smile-producing consciousness, twelve ethically variable states, excluding desire, enter into combination (7 + 5 = 12).
|2.54
(ii)Likewise they occur in the determining consciousness, excluding desire and zest (7 + 4 = 11).
|2.55
(iii)In the investigating consciousness accompanied by joy, all those except desire and energy occur (7 + 4 = 11).
|2.56
(iv)In the triple mind element and in the pair of rootless rebirth-linking types of consciousness, all those except desire, zest, and energy occur (7 + 3 = 10).
|2.57
(v)In the two types of fivefold sense consciousness, all those enter into combination except the occasionals (7).
Thus altogether, for the eighteen types of rootless consciousness, the combinations, numerically considered, constitute four groups.
|
Guide to § 28
The determining consciousness (votthapana): This consciousness
is the same as the mind-door adverting consciousness, which in the five
sense doors performs the function of determining the object.
The investigating consciousness accompanied by joy: This citta, a
wholesome kamma resultant arisen in regard to an exceptionally desir-
able object, includes zest because the associated feeling is joy. In this
citta and those to follow, energy is excluded, because these rootless types
of consciousness are weak and passive.
The triple mind element {manodhatuttika): This is a collective term
for the five-door adverting consciousness (pancadvaravajjana) and the
two types of receiving consciousness (sampaticchana).
Pair of rootless rebirth-linking types of consciousness
(patisandhi): These are the two kinds of investigating consciousness
accompanied by equanimity. Their role in rebirth-linking is explained
at III, §9.
§29 Summary
`110
|2.58
Twelve, eleven, ten, seven —thus the combination in the eighteen rootless types of consciousness is fourfold.
|2.59
In all the rootless the seven (universals) occur. The rest (the occasionals) arise according to the type. Thus in detail the combinations are told in thirty-three ways.
§30 Conclusion
|2.60
Understanding thus the associations and combinations of the mental adjuncts, let one explain their division, which is the same as that of the types of consciousness, according to their association with them.
Thus ends the second chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Mental Factors.
|
Guide to § 30
The associations ... of the mental adjuncts: This refers to the association of each cetasika with the different cittas in which it is found,
explained in §§10-17.
The combinations of the mental adjuncts: This refers to the analysis
of each citta into its component cetasikas, explained in §§18-29. For a
comprehensive view of both the method of association and the method
of combination together, see Table 2.4 at the end of this chapter.
Let one explain their classification, etc.: The author advises the
student to categorize the cetasikas by way of the cittas to which they
pertain. For example, the seven universals are eighty-ninefold because
they arise in all cittas. Initial application is fifty-fivefold because it arises
in fifty-five cittas. The cetasikas can further be divided by way of plane,
kind, associations, etc., in accordance with their host consciousness.


`111
TABLE 2.4:
COMPREHENSIVE CHART ON MENTAL FACTORS
`114
CHAPTER III
COMPENDIUM OF THE MISCELLANEOUS

§1 Introductory Verse
|3.1
Having explained accordingly the fifty-three associated states — consciousness and mental factors—with respect to their intrinsic nature, 
|3.2
now, taking consciousness alone, we will deal concisely with its classification by way of feelings, roots, functions, doors, objects,
and bases.
|
Guide to §1
The fifty-three associated states: Though 89 (or 121) types of
consciousness are recognized in the Abhidhamma, these are treated
collectively as a single dhamma or reality because they all have the same
characteristic, namely, the cognizing of an object. However, the fifty-
two cetasikas are considered to be each a separate reality because they
all have different characteristics. Thus there are altogether fifty-three
associated mental phenomena.
Taking consciousness alone (cittuppadavasen, eva): The Pali term
cittuppada literally means an arising of consciousness. In other contexts
it implies the citta together with its collection of cetasikas but here it
denotes citta itself. Nevertheless, it should be understood that con-
sciousness always occurs in indissoluble union with its cetasikas, which
often form the basis for its analysis and classification.
`115
Compendium of Feeling
(vedanasangaha)
§2 Analysis of Feeling
|3.3
In the compendium of feeling there are first three kinds of feeling, namely, pleasant, painful, and that which is neither painful nor pleasant. Again, feeling is analyzed as fivefold: pleasure, pain, joy, displeasure, and equanimity.
|
Guide to §2
Analysis of feeling: As we have seen, feeling {vedana) is a universal
mental factor, the cetasika with the function of experiencing the “flavour”
of the object. Since some sort of feeling accompanies every citta, feeling
serves as an important variable in terms of which consciousness can be
classified. In this section the author’s main concern is to classify the
totality of cittas by way of their concomitant feeling.
Three kinds of feeling: Feeling may be analyzed as either threefold
or fivefold. When it is analyzed simply in terms of its affective quality,
it is threefold: pleasant, painful, and neither-painful-nor-pleasant. In this
threefold classification, pleasant feeling includes both bodily pleasure
and mental pleasure or joy, and painful feeling includes both bodily pain
and mental pain or displeasure.
Feeling is analyzed as fivefold: When feeling is analyzed by way
of the governing faculty (indriya), it becomes fivefold. These five types
of feelings are called faculties because they exercise lordship or control
(indra) over their associated states with respect to the affective mode
of experiencing the object.
When the fivefold analysis of feeling is considered, the pleasant
feeling of the threefold scheme becomes divided into pleasure and joy,
the former bodily and the latter mental; the painful feeling of the threefold
scheme becomes divided into pain and displeasure, again the former
bodily and the latter mental; and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling
becomes identified with equanimity or neutral feeling.
In the Suttas the Buddha sometimes also speaks of feeling as twofold,
pleasure (sukha) and pain {dukkha). This is a loose or metaphorical
method of analysis, arrived at by merging the blameless neutral feeling
in pleasure and the blameworthy neutral feeling in pain. The Buddha
`116
further declares that whatever is felt is included in suffering (yam kind
vedayitam tam dukkhasmim, S.36:11/iv, 216). In this statement the word
dukkha does not bear the narrow meaning of painful feeling, but the
broader meaning of the suffering inherent in all conditioned things by
reason of their impermanence.
Pleasure (sukha) has the characteristic of experiencing a desirable
tangible object, the function of intensifying associated states, mani-
festation as bodily enjoyment, and its proximate cause is the body faculty.
Pain {dukkha) has the characteristic of experiencing an undesirable
tangible object, the function of withering associated states, manifestation
as bodily affliction, and its proximate cause is also the body faculty.
Joy {somanassa) has the characteristic of experiencing a desirable
object, the function of partaking of the desirable aspect of the object,
manifestation as mental enjoyment, and its proximate cause is tran-
quillity.1
Displeasure {domanassa) has the characteristic of experiencing an
undesirable object, the function of partaking of the undesirable aspect
of the object, manifestation as mental affliction, and its proximate cause
is the heart-base.2
Equanimity {upekkha) has the characteristic of being felt as neutral,
the function of neither intensifying nor withering associated states, 
manifestation as peacefulness, and its proximate cause is consciousness
without zest.3
§3 Classification by way of Consciousness
`117
|3.4
Of them, wholesome-resultant body-consciousness is the only one accompanied by pleasure.
Similarly, unwholesome-resultant body-consciousness is the only one accompanied by pain.
|3.5
There are sixty-two kinds of consciousness accompanied by joy, namely:
(a)eighteen types of sense-sphere consciousness—four rooted in greed, twelve types of sense-sphere beautiful consciousness, the two(rootless) types, i.e. joyful investigating and smiling consciousness (4+ 12 + 2);
(b)forty-four types of sublime and supramundane consciousness pertaining to the first, second, third, and fourth jhanas (12 + 32).
|3.6
Only the two types of consciousness connected with aversion are accompanied by displeasure.
|3.7
All the remaining fifty-five types of consciousness are accompanied by equanimity.
|
Guide to §3
The remaining fifty-five: Those cittas accompanied by equanimity are:
(1)	six unwholesome cittas, four rooted in greed, two in delusion;
(2)	fourteen rootless cittas;
(3)	twelve sense-sphere beautiful cittas (four each wholesome,
resultant, and functional);
(4)	three cittas of the fifth jhana;
(5)	twelve cittas of the immaterial jhanas; and
(6)	eight supramundane cittas, i.e. the paths and fruits pertaining to
the fifth supramundane jhana.
§4 Summary
|3.8
Feeling, therein, is threefold, namely, pleasure, pain, and equanimity. Together with joy and displeasure it is fivefold.
|3.9
Pleasure and pain are each found in one, displeasure in two, joy in sixty-two, and the remaining (i.e. equanimity) in fifty-five
|
Guide to §4
Pleasure and pain are each found in one: It should be noted that
while the four pairs of sense consciousness other than body-consciousness
are accompanied by equanimous feeling, body-consciousness arises in
connection with either pleasure or pain. The Atthasalinl explains that in
the case of the four doors-eye, ear, nose, and tongue—the sense object,
which is derived matter, impinges on the sense faculty, which is also
`118
derived matter. When this happens, the impact is not strong, as when
four balls of cotton placed on anvils are struck by four other balls of
cotton. Thus the resulting feeling is neutral. But in the case of the body,
the object consists of three of the primary elements—earth, fire, and air.
Thus when the object impinges on body-sensitivity, its impact is strong
and is conveyed to the primary elements of the body. This is comparable
to four balls of cotton being struck by hammers: the hammer breaks
through the cotton and hits the anvil. In the case of a desirable object
the body-consciousness is a wholesome-resultant and the concomitant
bodily feeling is physical pleasure, in the case of an undesirable object
the body-consciousness is an unwholesome-resultant and the concomitant
bodily feeling is physical pain.4
TABLE 3.1: COMPENDIUM OF FEELING
`119
Though it may seem that pleasure and pain also accompany the other
four kinds of sense consciousness, the Abhidhamma maintains that the
immediate moment of sense consciousness in these cases is necessarily
accompanied by neutral feeling. In the javana phase belonging to the
same cognitive process as the moment of sense consciousness, and in
subsequent mind-door processes taking the same object, mental pleasure
(that is, somanassa or joy) may arise towards an agreeable sight, sound,
smell, or taste; mental pain (that is, domanassa or displeasure) may arise
towards a disagreeable sight, etc.; and equanimity or neutral feeling
(upekkha) may arise towards an object regarded with indifference or
detachment. These, however, are mental feelings rather than physical
feelings, and they arise subsequent to the moment of bare sense
consciousness rather than in immediate association with the bare sense
consciousness. As they occur in the javana phase, these feelings are
associated with wholesome or unwholesome consciousness, or—in the
case of the joy and equanimity experienced by Arahants —with functional
consciousness.5


Compendium of Roots
§5 Analysis of Roots
|3.10
In the compendium of roots there are six roots, namely, greed, hatred, delusion, non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion.
|
Guide to §5
Analysis of roots: In this section all types of consciousness are
classified by way of their concomitant hetus or “roots.” In the Suttas
the word hetu is used in the general sense of cause or reason (karana).
There it is synonymous with the word paccaya, condition, with which
it is often conjoined, and it applies to any phenomenon that functions
as a cause or reason for other things. In the Abhidhamma, however, hetu
is used exclusively in the specialized sense of root (miHa), and it is
restricted in application to six mental factors representing ethically
significant qualities.
Formally defined, a root is a mental factor which establishes firmness
and stability in the cittas and cetasikas with which it is associated.6 For
it is said that those cittas that possess roots are firm and stable, like trees,
`120
while those that are rootless are weak and unstable, like moss.7
Of the six roots enumerated in the text, three —greed, hatred, and
delusion—are exclusively unwholesome, while three—non-greed, non-
hatred, and non-delusion —may be either wholesome or indeterminate.
They are wholesome when they arise in wholesome cittas and indeter-
minate when they arise in resultant and functional cittas. In either case,
whether wholesome or indeterminate, these three roots are beautiful
(sobhana) cetasikas.
§6 Classification by way of Consciousness
|3.11
Therein, eighteen types of consciousness are without roots, namely, five-door adverting, the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, and smiling (1 + 5 + 5 + 2 + 3 + 1 + 1). 
|3.12
All the remaining seventy-one types of consciousness are with roots.
|3.13
Of them the two types of consciousness associated with sheer delusion have only one root. 
|3.14
The remaining ten unwholesome types of consciousness and the twelve sense-sphere beautiful types of
consciousness dissociated from knowledge —thus totalling twenty-two—are with two roots.
|3.15
The twelve sense-sphere beautiful types of consciousness associated with knowledge, and the thirty-five sublime and supramundane types of consciousness—thus totalling forty-seven—are with three roots.
|
Guide to §6
The remaining ten unwholesome types of consciousness: The eight
cittas accompanied by greed have greed and delusion as roots; the two
cittas accompanied by aversion have hatred and delusion as roots.
The twelve ... dissociated from knowledge: These sense-sphere
beautiful cittas—four each wholesome, resultant, and functional—are
conditioned by non-greed and non-hatred; non-delusion is excluded
because they are dissociated from knowledge.
Forty-seven ... with three roots: These cittas are conditioned by the
three beautiful roots.
§7 Summary
|3.16
Greed, hatred, and delusion are the three unwholesome roots. Non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion are (the three roots that are) wholesome and indeterminate.
|
TABLE 3.2: COMPENDIUM OF ROOTS
`122
|3.17
It should be understood that eighteen (types of consciousness) are without roots, two with one root, twenty-two with two roots, and forty-seven with three roots.
|
Compendium of Functions
(kiccasangaha)
§8 Analysis of Functions
|3.18
In the compendium of functions there are fourteen functions, namely: (1) rebirth-linking, (2) life-continuum, (3) adverting, (4) seeing, (5) hearing, (6) smelling, (7) tasting, (8) touching, (9) receiving, (10) investigating, (11) determining, (12) javana, (13) registration, and (14) death.
|3.19
Their further classification should be understood by way of stage as tentoid, namely: (I) rebirth-linking, {2) life-continuum, (J) adverting, (4) fivefold sense consciousness, and so forth.
|
Guide to §8
Analysis of functions: In this section the eighty-nine types of
consciousness are classified by way of function. The Abhidhamma posits
altogether fourteen functions performed by different kinds of
consciousness. These are exercised either at distinct phases within the
cognitive process (3-13) or on occasions when consciousness is occurring
outside the cognitive process, that is, in process-freed (vlthimutta)
consciousness (1,2, 14).
(1)	Rebirth-linking (patisandhi): This function exercised at
conception is called rebirth-linking because it links the new existence
to the previous one. The consciousness that performs this function, the
patisandhicitta or rebirth-linking consciousness, occurs only once in any
individual existence, at the moment of rebirth.
(2)	Life-continuum (bhavanga): The word bhavanga means factor
(anga) of existence (bhava), that is, the indispensable condition of
existence. Bhavanga is the function of consciousness by which the
`123
continuity of the individual is preserved through the duration of any
single existence, from conception to death. After the patisandhicitta has
arisen and fallen away, it is then followed by the bhavangacitta, which
is a resultant consciousness of the same type as the patisandhicitta but
which performs a different function, namely, the function of preserving
the continuity of the individual existence. Bhavangacittas arise and pass
away every moment during life whenever there is no active cognitive
process taking place. This type of consciousness is most evident during
deep dreamless sleep, but it also occurs momentarily during waking life
countless times between occasions of active cognition.
When an object impinges on a sense door, the bhavanga is arrested
and an active cognitive process ensues for the purpose of cognizing the
object. Immediately after the cognitive process is completed, again the
bhavanga supervenes and continues until the next cognitive process
arises. Arising and perishing at every moment during this passive phase
of consciousness, the bhavanga flows on like a stream, without remaining
static for two consecutive moments.
(3) Adverting (avajjana): When an object impinges at one of the
sense doors or at the mind door, there occurs a mind-moment called
bhamnga-calana, vibration of the life-continuum, by which the bhavanga
consciousness “vibrates” for a single moment. This is followed by another
moment called bhavanga-upaccheda, arrest of the life-continuum, by
continuity of the individual is preserved through the duration of any
single existence, from conception to death. After the patisandhicitta has
arisen and fallen away, it is then followed by the bhavangacitta, which
is a resultant consciousness of the same type as the patisandhicitta but
which performs a different function, namely, the function of preserving
the continuity of the individual existence. Bhavangacittas arise and pass
away every moment during life whenever there is no active cognitive
process taking place. This type of consciousness is most evident during
deep dreamless sleep, but it also occurs momentarily during waking life
countless times between occasions of active cognition.
When an object impinges on a sense door, the bhavanga is arrested
and an active cognitive process ensues for the purpose of cognizing the
object. Immediately after the cognitive process is completed, again the
bhavanga supervenes and continues until the next cognitive process
arises. Arising and perishing at every moment during this passive phase
of consciousness, the bhavanga flows on like a stream, without remaining
static for two consecutive moments.
(3) Adverting (avajjana): When an object impinges at one of the
sense doors or at the mind door, there occurs a mind-moment called
bhamnga-calana, vibration of the life-continuum, by which the bhavanga
consciousness “vibrates” for a single moment. This is followed by another
moment called bhavanga-upaccheda, arrest of the life-continuum, by
which the flow of the bhavanga is cut off. Immediately after this, a citta
arises turning to the object, either at one of the five physical sense doors
or at the mind door. This function of turning to the object is termed
adverting.
(4-8) Seeing, etc.: In a cognitive process at the sense doors, after the
moment of adverting, there arises a citta which directly cognizes the
impingent object. This citta, and the specific function it performs, is
determined by the nature of the object. If the object is a visible form,
eye-consciousness arises seeing it; if it is a sound, ear-consciousness
arises hearing it, and so forth. In this context, the functions of seeing
and hearing, etc., do not refer to the cognitive acts which explicitly
identify the objects of sight and hearing, etc., as such. They signify, 
rather, the rudimentary momentary occasions of consciousness by which
the sense datum is experienced in its bare immediacy and simplicity prior
to all identificatory cognitive operations.
(9-11) Receiving, etc.: In the case of a cognitive process through any
of the five sense doors, following the citta that performs the function of
seeing, etc., there arise in succession cittas that perform the functions
of receiving (sampaticchana), investigating (santlrana), and determining
(votthapana) the object. In the case of a cognitive process occurring in
`124
the mind door independently of the physical senses, these three functions
do not occur; rather, mind-door adverting follows immediately upon the
cutting off of the bhavanga without any intermediate functions.
(12)	Javana: Javana is a technical term of Abhidhamma usage that
is best left untranslated. The literal meaning of the word is running
swiftly. As a function of consciousness it applies to the stage of the
cognitive process that immediately follows the determining stage,8 and
consists of a series of cittas (normally seven, all identical in kind) which
“run swiftly” over the object in the act of apprehending it. The javana
stage is the most important from an ethical standpoint, for it is at this
point that wholesome or unwholesome cittas originate.9
(13)	Registration (tadarammana): The word tadcirammana means
literally “having that object,” and denotes the function of taking as object
the object that had been apprehended by the javanas. This function is
exercised for two mind-moments immediately after the javana phase in
a sense-sphere cognitive process when the object is either very prominent
to the senses or clear to the mind. When the object lacks special
prominence or clarity, as well as in other types of cognitive process apart
from the sense-sphere process, this function is not exercised at all.
Following registration (or the javana phase when registration does not
occur) the stream of consciousness again lapses back into the bhavanga.
(14)	Death (cuti): The death consciousness is the last citta to occur
in an individual existence; it is the citta which marks the exit from a
particular Iite. This citta is of the same type as the rebirth-linking
consciousness and the bhavanga, and like them it pertains to the process-
freed side of existence, the passive flow of consciousness outside an
active cognitive process. It differs from them in that it performs a
different function, namely, the function of passing away.
By way of stage as tenfold: The word “stage” (thana) means a
moment or occasion between two other cittas at which a given citta is
able to arise. Although there are fourteen functions of consciousness,
the five sensory functions of seeing, etc., all occupy the same stage of
the cognitive process, between the two stages of adverting and receiving.
Thus the fourteen functions can be condensed into ten stages of
consciousness.
§9 Classification by way of Consciousness
`125
|3.20
Of them, nineteen types of consciousness perform the functions of rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death. 
They are: two types of investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity; eight great resultants; and nine fine-material-sphere and immaterial-sphere resultants (2 + 8 + 9 = 19).
|3.21
Two perform the function of adverting.
|3.22
Similarly, two perform each of the functions of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and receiving.
|3.23
Three perform the function of investigating.
|3.24
The mind-door adverting consciousness performs the function of determining in the five sense doors.
|3.25
With the exception of the two types of adverting consciousness, the fifty-five types of unwholesome, wholesome, fruition and functional consciousness perform the function of javana.
|3.26
The eight great resultants and the three types of investigating consciousness, totalling eleven, perform the function of registration.
|
Guide to §9
Classification by way of consciousness: The present section will be
less likely to cause perplexity if it is recognized that there is a distinction
between a type of consciousness and the function after which it is
commonly named. Although certain types of consciousness are named
after a single function that they perform, this name is chosen as a
convenient designation and does not mean that the type of consciousness
so named is confined to that particular function. To the contrary, a given
type of consciousness may perform several functions completely different
from the one with reference to which it is named.
The functions of rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death: As
pointed out above, in any single life it is the same type of consciousness
that performs the three functions of rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and
death. At the moment of conception this type of consciousness arises
linking the new existence to the old one; throughout the course of life
this same type of consciousness arises countless times as the passive flow
`126
of the bhavanga, maintaining the continuity of existence; and at death
this same type of consciousness again occurs as the passing away from
the old existence.
There are nineteen cittas which perform these three functions. The
unwholesome-resultant investigating consciousness (santirana) does so
in the case of those beings who take rebirth into the woeful planes—the
hells, the animal realm, the sphere of petas, and the host of asuras. The
wholesome-resultant investigating consciousness accompanied by
equanimity performs these functions in the case of a human rebirth as
one who is congenitally blind, deaf, dumb, etc., as well as among certain
lower classes of gods and spirits. While the deformity itself is due to
unwholesome kamma, the human rebirth is the result of wholesome
kamma, though of a relatively weak degree. It should not be thought
that investigation occurs at the moment of rebirth or during the life-
continuum, for a consciousness can perform only one function at a time.
The eight great resultants—the beautiful sense-sphere resultants with
two and three roots—perform these three functions for those reborn in
the fortunate sensuous realms as gods and humans free from congenital
defects.
The above ten cittas pertain to rebirth in the sensuous plane.
The five fine-material-sphere resultants serve as rebirth consciousness, 
life-continuum, and death consciousness for those reborn into the fine-
material Diane of existence, and the four immaterial-snhere resultants
for those reborn into the respective immaterial planes of existence.
The function of adverting: The five-sense-door adverting con-
sciousness {pancadvaravajjana) performs this function when a sense
object impinges on one of the five physical sense doors. The mind-door
adverting consciousness (manodvaravajjana) does so when an object
arises at the mind door. Both these cittas are rootless functionals
(ahetukakiriya).
The function of seeing, etc.: The two cittas that perform each of these
five functions are the wholesome-resultant and unwholesome-resultant
eye-consciousness, etc.
Receiving: The function of receiving is performed by the two types
of receiving consciousness (sampaticchanacitta).
The function of investigating: The three cittas that perform this
function are the two rootless resultants accompanied by equanimity —
one wholesome-resultant, the other unwholesome-resultant—and the
rootless wholesome-resultant accompanied by joy.
The function of determining: There is no distinct citta known as
determining consciousness. It is the same type of citta—a rootless
functional consciousness accompanied by equanimity (see I, §10)—that
`127 table
`128
performs the function of mind-door adverting in the mind-door process
and the function of determining in a process in the five physical sense
doors.
The function of javana: The fifty-five cittas that function as javanas
are the twelve unwholesome cittas, twenty-one wholesome cittas, four
resultants (i.e. the supramundane fruits), and eighteen functionals (the
two adverting cittas being excepted).
The function of registration: These eleven are resultant cittas. When
the three investigating consciousnesses perform the function of
registration, they do not simultaneously perform the function of
investigating.

§10 Classification by Numbers of Functions
|3.27
Of them, the two types of investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity perform five functions—rebirth-linking, life-continuum, death, registration, and investigating.
|3.28
The eight great resultants perform four functions —rebirth-linking, life-continuum, death, and registration.
|3.29
The nine sublime resultants perform three functions—rebirth-relinking, life-continuum, and death.
|3.30
The investigating consciousness accompanied by joy performs two functions —investigating and registration.
|3.31
Similarly, the determining consciousness performs two functions—determining and adverting.
|3.32
All the remaining types of consciousness-javana, the triple mind element, and the two types of fivefold sense consciousness—perform only one function as they arise.
|
`129
Guide to §10
Javana: The fifty-five cittas that perform the function of javana occur
solely in the role of javana and do not perform any other functions.
The triple mind element: the five-door adverting consciousness and
the two types of receiving consciousness.
§11 Summary
|3.33
The types of consciousness are declared to be fourteen according to functions such as rebirth-linking and so forth, and ten according to analysis by stages.
|3.34
It is stated that those which perform one function are sixty-eight; two functions, two; three functions, nine; four functions, eight; and five functions, two respectively.
|
Compendium of Doors
{dvarasangaha)
§12 Analysis of Doors
|3.35
In the compendium of doors, there are six doors, namely: eye door, ear door, nose door, tongue door, body door, and mind door.
|3.36
Therein, the eye itself is the eye door;
|3.37
and so for the ear door and the others. 
|3.38
But the life-continuum is called the mind door.
|
Guide to §12
Analysis of doors: The term “door” {dvara) is used metaphorically
in the Abhidhamma to denote the media through which the mind interacts
with the objective world. Three doors of action are specified —body,
speech, and mind—the channels through which the mind acts upon the
`130
world (see V, §§22-24). Again, six doors of cognition are recognized:
the six sense doors by which the citta and cetasikas go out to meet the
object and by which objects enter into range of the citta and cetasikas.
In the present section the author will first enumerate the six sense doors.
Then he will identify the cittas that arise through each door and classify
the cittas according to the number of doors through which they arise.
The eye itself is the eye door: Five of the doors are material
phenomena {rupa), namely, the sensitive matter {pasadarupa) in each
of the five sense organs. Each of these serves as a door by which the
citta and cetasikas occurring in a cognitive process gain access to their
object, and by which the object becomes accessible to the cittas and ceta-
sikas. Eye-sensitivity is the door for the cittas belonging to an eye-door
process, enabling them to cognize visible forms through the eye. The
same holds for the other sensitivities of the sense organs in relation to
their respective processes and objects.
The life-continuum is called the mind door: Unlike the first five
doors, the mind door {manodvara) is not material but mental {nama),
namely, the bhavanga consciousness. When an object is to be cognized
by a mind-door process, the cittas belonging to that process gain access
to the object solely through the mind door, without immediate depend-
ence on any material sense faculty.
Different commentaries express contrary opinions about the precise
denotation of the mind door. The Vibhavinl-Tika states that the bhavanga
citta immediately preceding the mind-door adverting consciousness, i.e.
the arrest bhavanga (bhavanga-upaccheda), is the mind door. Other
Abhidhamma commentaries identify the mind door as the bhavanga citta
together with the mind-door adverting. However, Ledi Sayadaw and the
commentary to the Vibhanga both state that the entire bhavanga without
distinction is the mind door. Acariya Anuruddha did not make any
specifications but simply stated that the bhavanga is called the mind door.
§13 Classification by way of Consciousness
|3.39
Therein, forty-six types of consciousness arise in the eye door according to circumstances: five-door adverting, eye-consciousness, receiving, investigating, determining, sense-sphere javanas, and registration.
Likewise in the ear door, etc., forty-six types of consciousness arise, five-door adverting, ear-consciousness, and so forth.
It should be understood that altogether the fifty-four types of sense-sphere consciousness occur in the five doors.
|3.40
In the mind door sixty-seven types of consciousness arise: mind-door adverting, fifty-five javanas, and registration.
|3.41
Nineteen types of consciousness are door-freed, occurring by way of rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death.
|
`131
Guide to §13
Forty-six types of consciousness arise in the eye door: The forty-
six cittas are as follows:
1	five-door adverting consciousness
2	eye-consciousnesses
2	receiving consciousnesses
3	investigating consciousnesses
1 determining consciousness
29 sense-sphere javanas (12 unwholesome, b wholesome, 8 beau-
tiful functional, 1 smile-producing functional)
8 registration (= sense-sphere beautiful resultants; the other three
being included under investigating consciousness—see §9).
The same types of cittas arise in the other four physical sense doors
with their respective objects, except that in each case the pair of sense
consciousnesses are to be replaced in correlation with the sense door.
According to circumstances {yatharaham): Although a total of forty-
six cittas arise in the eye door, they cannot all arise together in one
process, but only as determined by conditions. Ledi Sayadaw specifies
these conditions as: (i) the object, (ii) the plane of existence, (iii) the
individual, and (iv) attention.
(i)	For example, if the object is undesirable, then the eye-consciousness,
receiving, investigating, and registration are unwholesome-resultants,
while if the object is desirable, then they are wholesome-resultants. If
the object is exceptionally desirable, the investigating and registration
consciousnesses are accompanied by joy, while if the object is only
moderately desirable, they are accompanied by equanimity.
(ii)	If an eye-door process occurs in the sensuous plane {kamabhumi),
all forty-six cittas can arise, but if the process occurs in the fine-material
`132
plane (rupabhumi) registration consciousness cannot arise, the function
of registration being confined to the sensuous plane.
(iii)	If the individual is a worldling or a trainee, the javana cittas will
be wholesome or unwholesome (according to the level of attainment in
the case of trainees), 10 while if the individual is an Arahant the javanas
will be functional.
(iv)	If a worldling or a trainee applies wise attention (yoniso mana-
sikcira), wholesome javanas will arise, while if unwise attention is
applied, unwholesome javanas will arise.
Similarly, whether prompted or unprompted cittas arise is also
governed by circumstances.
The fifty-four types of sense-sphere consciousness occur in the five
doors: In any single door, all types of sense-sphere consciousness occur
except for the four pairs of sense consciousness pertaining to the other
four sense faculties. Thus when these are totalled, all types of sense-
sphere consciousness occur in the five doors.
In the mind door: All fifty-five types of javana occur in the mind
door. Only twenty-two cittas do not occur in the mind door: the five-
door adverting, the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, the two types
of receiving consciousness, the five fine-material resultants, and the four
immaterial resultants.
Door-freed {dvaravimutta): These nineteen cittas, enumerated in §9,
are known as “door-freed” because their particular functions of rebirth,
plane (rHpabhlimi registration consciousness cannot arise, the function
of registration being confined to the sensuous plane.
(iii)	If the individual is a worldling or a trainee, the javana cittas will
be wholesome or unwholesome (according to the level of attainment in
the case of trainees), 10 while if the individual is an Arahant the javanas
will be functional.
(iv)	If a worldling or a trainee applies wise attention (yoniso mana-
sikcira), wholesome javanas will arise, while if unwise attention is
applied, unwholesome javanas will arise.
Similarly, whether prompted or unprompted cittas arise is also
governed by circumstances.
The fifty-four types of sense-sphere consciousness occur in the five
doors: In any single door, all types of sense-sphere consciousness occur
except for the four pairs of sense consciousness pertaining to the other
four sense faculties. Thus when these are totalled, all types of sense-
sphere consciousness occur in the five doors.
In the mind door: All fifty-five types of javana occur in the mind
door. Only twenty-two cittas do not occur in the mind door: the five-
door adverting, the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, the two types
of receiving consciousness, the five fine-material resultants, and the four
immaterial resultants.
Door-freed {dvaravimutta): These nineteen cittas, enumerated in §9,
are known as “door-freed” because their particular functions of rebirth,
bhavanga, and death do not occur in the sense doors and because they
do not receive any new object but apprehend only the object determined
by the last cognitive process of the preceding existence (see below, §17).
§14 Classification by Number of Doors
|3.42
Of those (that arise through doors), thirty-six types of consciousness —the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness and the sublime and supramundane javanas—are with one door accordingly.
|3.43
The three mind elements arise through five doors.
|3.44
Joyful investigation, determining, and the sense-sphere javanas arise through six doors.
|3.45
Investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity and the great resultants arise either through the six doors or as door-freed.
|3.46
The sublime resultants always arise as door-freed.
|

`133
`134
Guide to §14
Accordingly: The two sets of fivefold sense consciousness arise only
in their respective sense doors, the sublime and supramundane javanas
arise only in the mind door.
Joyful investigating: This citta arises with the functions of investi-
gating and registration in the five sense doors and with the function of
registration alone in the mind door.
Determining: This citta performs the function of determining in the
five sense doors and the function of adverting in the mind door.
The great resultants: These eight cittas, like the two types of
investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity, arise through
the six doors in the role of registration, and as door-freed in the roles of
rebirth, bhavanga, and death consciousness.
The sublime resultants: These nine cittas—the five fine-material-
sphere resultants and the four immaterial-sphere resultants —arise
exclusively in their respective planes as rebirth, bhavanga, and death
consciousness. Hence they are always free of doors.
§15 Summary
|3.47
Thirty-six types of consciousness arise through one door, three through five doors, thirty-one through six doors, ten through six doors or as door-freed, nine wholly free from a door. Thus in five ways they are shown.
|
`135
Compendium of Objects
(alambanasangaha)
§16 Analysis of Objects
|3.48
In the compendium of objects, there are six kinds of objects, namely, visible form object, sound object, smell object, taste object, tangible object, and mental object.
|3.49
Therein, visible form itself is visible form object. Likewise, sound, etc., are sound object, etc.
|3.50
But mental object is sixfold: sensitive matter, subtle matter, consciousness, mental factors, Nibbana, and concepts.
|
Guide to §16
Analysis of objects: Every consciousness, along with its associated
mental factors, necessarily takes an object, for consciousness itself
essentially consists in the activity of cognizing an object. In Pali two
principal words are used to denote an object. One is cirammana, derived
from a root meaning “to delight in.” The other is nlambana, derived
from an altogether different root meaning “to hang on to.” Thus the
object is that which consciousness and its concomitants delight in or
that which they hang on to. In this section the author will first specify
the kinds of objects. Then he will determine which kinds of objects
occur through each of the six doors as well as to door-freed
consciousness. Finally he will determine the range of objects taken by
each type of consciousness.
Six kinds of objects: In the Abhidhamma six kinds of objects are
recognized, corresponding to the six senses. The first five are all included
in the category of materiality.11 Four of these —visible form, sound, smell,
and taste —are considered to be kinds of derived matter (upada rupa),
that is, secondary material phenomena dependent on the primary elements
of matter. The tangible object is identified with three of the four primary
elements themselves: the earth element, or solidity, which is experienced
by touch as hardness or softness; the fire element, which is experienced
`136
as heat or cold; and the air element, which is experienced as distension
or pressure. The fourth primary element, the water element, has the
characteristic of cohesion, and this, according to the Abhidhamma, cannot
be experienced as a datum of touch but can only be cognized through
the mind door.12
Mental object is sixfold: Each of the first five objects can be cognized
in any of these ways: (1) through its own respective sense-door process;
(2) through a mind-door process; and (3) by the process-freed cittas
occurring in the roles of rebirth-linking, bhavanga, and death. Mental
objects—the objects of the sixth classcannot be cognized at all through
a sense-door process. They can be cognized only by the cittas of a mind-
door process or by the process-freed cittas that occur independent of the
sense doors.
Six kinds of objects fall into the category of mental object (dham-
marammana). Sensitive matter {pasadarupa) is the sensory receptive
substance in the five sense organs; it is fivefold, eye-sensitivity, ear-
sensitivity, etc. Subtle matter (sukhumarUpa) includes sixteen species
of material phenomena enumerated below (VI, §6), among them the water
element. Citta is also a type of mental object. Though citta experiences
objects, citta in turn can become an object. It should be noted that a citta
in its immediacy cannot become its own object, for the cognizer cannot
cognize itself; but a citta in an individual mental continuum can
exnerience earlier cittas in that same continuum as well as the cittas of
door process, as for example, when one becomes aware of one’s feelings, 
volitions, and emotions. Nibbana becomes the object of cittas occurring
in the mental processes of noble individuals, both trainees and Arahants.
Concepts—the class of conventional realities, things which do not exist
in the ultimate sense —also fall into the category of mental object.
§17 Classification by way of Doors
|3.51
For all types of eye-door consciousnesses, visible form alone is the object, and that pertains only to the present. Likewise, sounds, etc., are the object of ear-door consciousnesses, etc., and those too pertain only to the present.
|3.52
But the object of mind-door consciousnesses is of six kinds, and that object may be present, past, future, or independent of time, according to circumstances.
|3.53
Further, in the case of the door-freed-consciousnesses —that is, rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death (consciousness)—the object is sixfold, and according to the situation (that object) has usually been apprehended in (one of) the six doors in the immediately preceding existence, as either a present or past object or as a concept.
It is known as kamma, or as sign of kamma, or as sign of destiny.
|
`137
Guide to §17
For all types of eye-door consciousnesses: In an eye-door cognitive
process, all the cittas pertaining to that process take the visible form as
their object. The visible form is not the object solely of eye-consciousness.
The five-door adverting consciousness, the receiving, investigating and
determining consciousnesses, the javanas, and the registration cittas also
occur with the same visible form as their object. Further, these cittas
occurring in an eye-door process take “visible form alone” (rupam eva)
as object. Within that process they cannot cognize any other kind of
object.
And that pertains only to the present: The word “present” is used
here in the sense of “momentary present” (khatiikapaccuppanna), that
is, in reference to what has actual being at the present moment of
experience. Since material phenomena have a slower rate of change than
mental phenomena, a single visible form can remain present to all the
cittas in a process occurring in the eye door. So too for the objects of
the other physical senses. (See below, pp. 156-57)
The object of mind-door consciousness: The cittas that arise in a
mind-door process can cognize any of the five physical sense objects as
well as all types of mental objects inaccessible to the cittas in a sense-
door process. Mind-door cittas can also cognize an object belonging to
any of the three periods of time —past, present, or future—or one that
is independent of time (kalavimutta). This last expression applies to
Nibbana and concepts. Nibbana is timeless because its intrinsic nature
(sabhava) is without arising, change and passing away; concepts are
timeless because they are devoid of intrinsic nature.
`138
According to circumstances: The Vibhavinl-Tika explains: according
to whether the cittas are sense-sphere javanas, direct-knowledge javanas,
the remaining sublime javanas, etc. For the sense-sphere javanas, except
the smile-producing consciousness, take objects of the three times and
timeless objects. The smile-producing consciousness takes only objects
of the three times. The direct-knowledge cittas (or abhinnas—see Guide
to § 18) take objects of the three times as well as the timeless. The sublime
javanas take timeless objects (i.e. concepts), except for the second and
fourth immaterial jhanas, which take past cittas as objects. The supra-
mundane javanas take a timeless object, Nibbana.
In the case of the door-freed consciousness, etc.: The door-freed
consciousness is the citta that performs, in any single life, the three
functions of rebirth-linking, bhavanga, and death. It is of nineteen types,
as explained earlier (§9). The object of this citta can be of six kinds: it
can be any of the five sense objects, either past or present, or it can be
a mental object. In all three of its functions, this citta retains the same
object from the rebirth moment to the moment of decease. That same
object is grasped at the moment of rebirth by the relinking consciousness;
during the course of life it is held to by every bhavanga citta; and at the
moment of death it is held to by the death consciousness.
The object of the door-freed consciousness in any given existence is
generally identical with the object of the last cognitive process in the
immediately preceding existence. When a person is on the verge of death,
in the last phase of active consciousness some object will present itself
to the cognitive process, determined by previous kamma and present
circumstances. This object can be one of three kinds:
(1)	It can be a kamma, a good or evil deed performed earlier during
the same lifetime.
(2)	It can be a sign of kamma (kammanimitta), that is, an object or
image associated with the good or evil deed that is about to determine
rebirth or an instrument used to perform it. For example, a devout person
may see the image of a monk or temple, a physician may see the image
of patients, a butcher may hear the groans of slaughtered cattle or see
an image of a butcher knife.
(3)	It can be a sign of destiny (gatinimitta), that is, a symbol of the
realm into which the dying person is about to be reborn. For example, a
person heading for a heavenly rebirth may see celestial mansions, a
person heading for an animal rebirth may see forests or fields, a person
heading for a rebirth in hell may see infernal fires.
According to the situation {yathasambhavam): The Vibhavinl-Tika
explains this phrase to mean that the object cognized by the door-freed
citta varies according to the door at which it was originally apprehended
`139
by the last mental process of the preceding life; according to whether it
is a present or past object or a concept; and according to whether it is a
kamma, a sign of kamma, or a sign of destiny. The explanation is as
follows:
In the case of a sense-sphere rebirth, any one of the five sense objects
apprehended in any of the six doors in the last javana process of the
preceding existence may become an object as sign of kamma. Such an
object, on the occasions of rebirth-linking and the first series of
bhavangas, can be either past or present. It can be present because the
sense object apprehended by the last javana process of the previous
existence may still persist as far as the first few mind-moments of the
new existence. Thereafter for the bhavanga, and for the death conscious-
ness of the new existence, that object is necessarily past.
A mental object apprehended in the mind door in the last javana
process of the previous existence may become an object of the rebirth-
linking, bhavanga, and death consciousnesses of the new existence as a
kamma or as a sign of kamma that is past. If the object should be a sign
of destiny, it is usually a visible form apprehended in the mind door and
is present.
In the case of a fine-material-sphere rebirth, the object of the three
process-freed cittas is a mental object apprehended in the mind-door
process of the preceding existence; it is a concept (hence timeless) and
is considered a sign of kamma. So too in the case of rebirth into the
first and third immaterial planes. In the case of rebirth into the second
and fourth immaterial planes, the object, being a citta, is a mental object;
it is past and is also considered a sign of kamma.
Usually {yebhuyyena): This qualification is added with reference to
those reborn after passing away from the realm of non-percipient beings
(asannasatta), a realm in the fine-material plane where consciousness is
altogether absent (see V, §31). For such beings the object of the door-
freed cittas cannot be something apprehended in the immediately preced-
ing existence, since in that existence there was no consciousness. For
these beings the object presents itself to the rebirth, bhavanga, and death
consciousness as a sign of kamma, etc., entirely through the power of a
past kamma from an existence prior to that in the non-percipient realm.
§18 Classification by Type of Consciousness
|3.54
Of these, eye-consciousness, etc., each take a single object, respectively, visible form, etc. 
|3.55
But the triple mind element takes (all) five kinds of (sense) object, visible form, etc. 
|3.56
The remaining sense-sphere resultants and the smiling consciousness always have only sense-sphere objects.
|3.57
The unwholesome (consciousnesses) and the sense-sphere javanas that are dissociated from knowledge take all objects except supramundane states.
|3.58
The sense-sphere wholesome (consciousnesses) associated with knowledge, and the wholesome direct-knowledge consciousness consisting in the fifth jhana, take all objects except the path and fruit of Arahantship.
|3.59
The sense-sphere functionals associated with knowledge, the functional direct-knowledge consciousness, and the determining consciousness can all take all kinds of objects.
|3.60
Among the immaterial (consciousnesses), the second and fourth take sublime objects. 
|3.61
All the remaining sublime consciousnesses take concepts as objects. 
|3.62
The supramundane consciousnesses take Nibbana as object.
|
`140
Guide to §18
The triple mind element: The five-door adverting consciousness and
the two kinds of receiving consciousness—collectively known as the
triple mind element —take all five kinds of sense objects, visible form,
etc., since they arise in all five doors.
The remaining sense-sphere resultants: These resultants —the three
investigating cittas and the eight great resultants—take all kinds of sense-
sphere objects presented at the six doors when they occur by way of
registration. Again, these same resultants—excluding the investigating
`141
consciousness accompanied by joy —take the six objects freed from doors
when they occur as rebirth, bhavanga, and death consciousness. The
smile-producing consciousness of Arahants also takes all six kinds of
sense-sphere objects.
The unwholesome, etc.: The nine supramundane states —the four
paths, their fruits, and Nibbana—because of their extreme purity and
profundity, cannot be apprehended by any unwholesome cittas nor by
wholesome and functional cittas devoid of knowledge.
The sense-sphere wholesome, etc.: Worldlings and trainees cannot
know the path and fruition consciousness of an Arahant. Since they have
not attained these states themselves, these two cittas remain inaccessible
to the wholesome sense-sphere cittas associated with knowledge that arise
in their mental process.
The path and fruition cittas of trainees are inaccessible to the cittas
of worldlings. The path and fruition cittas of trainees at a higher stage
are inaccessible to the cittas of trainees at a lower stage. The wholesome
sense-sphere cittas associated with knowledge can know the path and
TABLE 3.5: COMPENDIUM OF OBJECTS
Citta	Object
Eye-consciousness 2 Ear- " 2 Nose- •’ 2 Tongue- ” 2 Body- " 2	Present visible form Present sound Present smell Present taste Present tangible
Mind element 3	Present five objects
Invs. 3, smiling 1,  SS btf. rst. 8 12	SS citta 54, cetas. 52, mat. 28
Unwh. 12, SS btf. dissoc. knwl. wh. 4, fnc. 4 20	Mundane citta 81, cetas. 52, mat. 28, concepts
SS. btf. assoc, knwl. wh. 4,  wh. abhinna 1 5	87 citta (all exc. arh. path & frt.)» cetas. 52, mat. 28, Nibbana, concepts
SS btf. assoc, knwl. fnc. 4,  fnc. abhinna 1, m-d-advt. 6	All objects (= citta 89, cetas. 52,  mat. 28, Nibbana, concepts)
IS 2nd & 4th 6	Sublime : 1st & 3rd IS cittas resp.
FMS 15, IS 1st & 3rd 21	Concepts
Supramundane 8	NibbSna
`142
fruition cittas as well as Nibbana when trainees review their own supra-
mundane attainments. These same cittas take Nibbana as object on the
occasion called change-of-lineage (gotrabhii) immediately preceding the
arising of the supramundane path (see IX, §34).
The wholesome direct-knowledge consciousness: The direct
knowledges {abhinna) are types of higher knowledge accessible to those
who have mastery over the five jhanas. Five kinds of mundane direct
knowledge are mentioned in the texts: supernormal powers, the divine
ear, knowledge of others’ minds, the recollection of past lives, and the
divine eye (see below, IX, §21). These knowledges are acquired through
a special application of the fifth-jhana citta, wholesome in the case of
worldlings and trainees, functional in the case of Arahants. By the third
direct knowledge trainees with mastery of the fifth jhana can cognize
the path and fruition cittas of trainees on a level equal to or lower than
their own, but they cannot know the path and fruition cittas of those on
a higher level. The path and fruition consciousness of Arahantship is
utterly beyond range of the wholesome direct-knowledge citta.
The sense-sphere functional, etc: By means of the sense-sphere
functional cittas associated with knowledge, an Arahant can know his
own path and fruition cittas when reviewing his attainment, and by the
functional direct-knowledge citta he can know the path and fruition cittas
of other noble disciples, both trainees and Arahants. The determining
TABLE 3.6: CONCEPTUAL OBJECTS
OF SUBLIME CITTAS
i 3 Cittas O	Kasinas 10	Foulness 10	•o PQ	Breath 1	Beings (love) 1	Beings (comp.) 1	Beings (joy) 1	Beings (eqn.) 1	Infinite space 1	Nothingness 1	Total
FMS 1st Jhana 3											25
"2nd Jhana 3											14
"3rd Jhana 3											14
"4th Jhana 3											14
"5th Jhana 3											12
IS 1st Jhana 3											1
"3rd Jhana 3											1
`143
consciousness apprehends the five sense objects in a sense-door process
and all six objects in its role as the mind-door adverting consciousness.
Among the immaterial, etc.: The second immaterial citta takes the
first immaterial citta as object, while the fourth immaterial citta takes
the third as object. Thus these two cittas take sublime entities as object.
All the remaining sublime consciousnesses: The fine-material jhana
cittas take as object a conceptual entity such as the counterpart sign in
the case of the kasinas (see I, Guide to §§18-20), or living beings in the
case of the illimitables. The first immaterial citta takes as object the
concept of infinite space, the third takes as object the concept of
nothingness or non-existence. (See Table 3.6.)
§19 Summary
|3.63
Twenty-five types of consciousness are connected with lower objects; six with the sublime; twenty-one with concepts; eight with Nibbana.
Twenty are connected with all objects except the supramundane; five with all except the highest path and fruit; and six with all. Thus sevenfold is their grouping.
|
Guide to §19
Twenty-five types: The twenty-three sense-sphere resultants, the five-
door adverting, and the smile-producing consciousness take lower, i.e.
sense-sphere, objects only.
Six with the sublime: These are the second and fourth immaterial
jhanas, as wholesome, resultant, and functional.
Twenty-one with concepts: These are the five fine-material jhanas
and the first and third immaterial jhanas, all considered as wholesome,
resultant, and functional.
Eight with Nibbana: These are the paths and fruits.
Twenty ... except the supramundane: The twelve unwholesome, and
the four wholesome and four functionals dissociated from knowledge.
Five: the four sense-sphere wholesomes with knowledge and the
wholesome direct-knowledge citta.
Six with all: the four great functionals with knowledge, the functional
fifth jhana direct-knowledge citta, and the determining citta.
`144
Compendium of Bases
(vatthusangaha)
§20 Analysis of Bases
|3.64
In the summary of bases, there are six bases, namely, eye-, ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-, and heart-base.
|3.65
All these, too, are found in the sense world.
|3.66
But in the fine-material world three bases—nose, tongue, and body—are not found. 
|3.67
In the immaterial world no base exists.
|
Guide to §20
Analyses of bases: In those planes of existence where materiality
obtains, cittas and cetasikas arise in dependence on a condition called a
base (vatthu). A base is a physical support for the occurrence of
consciousness. Although the first five bases coincide with the first five
doors—namely, the sensitive matter of the five sense faculties —a base
is not identical with a door, since it plays a different role in the origination
of consciousness. A door is a channel through which the cittas and
cetasikas of a cognitive process gain access to the object; a base is a
physical support for the occurrence of cittas and cetasikas.
This difference in functions implies important consequences. In an
eye-door process many types of cittas apart from eye-consciousness occur
with eye-sensitivity as their door; but eye-sensitivity is the base solely
of eye-consciousness, not of the other cittas that utilize the eye door. In
relation to the doors, the various cittas that function as rebirth-linking,
bhavanga, and death consciousness are considered “door-freed,” that is, 
as occurring without any door. But in planes of existence which include
both mind and matter, no cittas occur without a base.
In the present section, the author will enumerate the bases and classify
cittas by way of the bases on which they depend.
Heart-base (hadayavatthu): According to the Pali commentators, the
heart serves as the physical support for all cittas other than the two sets
of fivefold sense consciousness, which take their respective sensitivities
as their bases. In the canonical Abhidhamma the heart-base is not
expressly mentioned. The Pattlmna, the last book of the Abhidhamma
Pitaka, simply speaks of “that matter in dependence on which the mind
`145
element and mind-consciousness element occur”（i,4). The Commen-
taries, however, subsequently specify “that matter” to be the heart-base,
a cavity situated within the physical heart.13
In the sense world, etc.: In the sensuous plane of existence all six
bases are found, except in the case of those who are born blind or deaf.
In the fine-material world the three bases of nose, tongue, and body —
the supports for the corresponding types of sensuous experience—are
absent, since these types of sense experience are coarser in quality than
the other two (sight and hearing) and thus are excluded from this elevated
plane. The commentators say that the beings there possess the physical
forms of these organs, but these organs lack sensitivity and hence cannot
serve as bases for smelling, tasting and touching, sensory experiences
that therefore do not occur in the fine-material realm. In the immaterial
world no bases exist because all the bases are made of matter.
§21 Classification by way of Consciousness
|3.68
Therein, the five elements of sense consciousness occur entirely dependent on the five sensitive parts (of the sense organs) as their respective bases (2x5= 10).
|3.69
But the mind element —namely, the five-door-adverting consciousness and the (two types of) receiving
consciousness—occurs in dependence on the heart.
|3.70
Likewise those that remain —namely, the mind-consciousness element comprising the investigating consciousness, the great resultants, the two accompanied by aversion, the first path consciousness, smiling consciousness, and fine-material-sphere consciousness—occur in dependence on the heart (3+ 3 + 8 + 2+ 1+ 1+ 15 = 33).
|3.71
The remaining classes of consciousness, whether wholesome, unwholesome, functional, or supramundane, may be either dependent on, or independent of, the heart-base (12 + 10 + 13 + 7 = 42). 
|3.72
The immaterial-sphere resultants are independent of the heart-base (4).
|
`146
Guide to §21
The five elements of sense consciousness, etc.: In the Abhidhamma
all eighty-nine types of citta are distributed among seven consciousness
elements {vinnanadhatu) as follows:
TABLE 3.7: THE SEVEN CONSCIOUSNESS ELEMENTS
Element	Cittas
Eye-cons. element Ear-cons. element Nose-cons. element Tongue-cons. element Body-cons. element Mind element Mind-cons. element	Eye-consciousness 2 Ear-consciousness 2 Nose-consciousness 2 T ongue-consciousness 2 Body-consciousness 2 5-d-advt., recv. cons. 3 All remaining cittas 76
The three cittas called mind element (manodhatu) involve a very weak
grasp of the object: the five-door adverting consciousness because it
encounters an utterly novel object and is followed by a citta with a
different base, the twofold receiving consciousness because it follows a
citta with a different base. The five elements of sense consciousness are
slightly stronger because they directly see, hear, smell, taste, or touch
the object, but they are still relatively weak because they come between
two cittas with bases different than their own. The cittas collected under
mind-consciousness element (manoviiinanadhatu), being preceded and
followed by cittas which share their own base, are capable of a fuller
and clearer cognitive grasp of their object.
But the mind-element... occurs in dependence on the heart: The
thirty-three cittas enumerated here do not arise in the immaterial world,
but only in worlds where matter exists. Hence they are always supported
by the heart-base. The cittas accompanied by aversion do not occur in
the fine-material and immaterial planes because aversion has been well
suppressed as a prerequisite for attaining jhana. The first path
consciousness, the path consciousness of stream-entry, cannot occur in
the immaterial realms because it is contingent on hearing the Dhamma,
which presupposes the ear faculty. The smile-producing consciousness,
of course, requires a body to exhibit the smile.
The remaining classes of consciousness: They are: ten unwholesome
cittas (excluding the two accompanied by aversion), the eight great
wholesome cittas, the eight great functionals, four immaterial wholesome,
four immaterial functionals, seven supramundane (excluding the first
path), and the mind-door adverting—a total of forty-two. These cittas
are dependent on the heart-base when they occur in the planes where
`148
matter exists, i.e. in the sensuous plane and the fine-material plane, and
independent of the heart-base when they occur in the immaterial plane.
The immaterial-sphere resultants occur only in the immaterial plane and
thus do not depend on any base. On the three planes, see V, §§3-7.
§22 Summary
|3.73
It should be known that in the sensuous plane seven elements are dependent on the six bases, in the fine-material plane four are dependent on three bases, in the immaterial plane the one single element is not dependent on any.
|3.74
Forty-three (types of consciousness) arise dependent on a base.
Forty-two arise with or without a base. The immaterial resultants arise without any base.
Thus ends the third chapter in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled the Compendium of the Miscellaneous.
|
Guide to §22
In the sense world, etc.: In the sensuous plane five consciousness
mind-consciousness element in dependence on the heart-base. In the fine-
material plane the nose-, tongue-, and body-bases, along with their
corresponding consciousness elements, are absent. In the immaterial plane
only mind-consciousness element occurs, and that without a base.

`149
CHAPTER IV
COMPENDIUM OF
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS
(Vlthisangahavibhaga)
§1 Introductory Verse
|4.1
Having thus completed the excellent compendium of states of consciousness, I shall briefly explain in due order the occurrence of consciousness both at rebirth-linking and during the course of existence, according to the planes and individuals, and as determined by what (states of consciousness) precede and follow.
|
Guide to §1
I shall briefly explain, etc.: In the preceding chapter the author has
classified the states of consciousness with their mental concomitants in
terms of such categories as feelings, roots, functions, and so forth. In
the next two chapters he will deal with the dynamics of consciousness
as it occurs in the process of life. The present chapter examines the oc-
currence of consciousness in the cognitive process (cittavithi), the next
chapter the occurrence of consciousness outside the cognitive process
(vlthimutta), on the occasions of rebirth, bhavanga, and death.
As determined by what (states of consciousness) precede and fol-
low (pubbaparaniyamitam): This phrase means that the cittas in any one
cognitive process, as well as in the preceding and following processes,
occur in due order in accordance with natural law.
`150
Enumeration of Categories
§2 The Six Sixes
|4.2
In the compendium of the cognitive process, six classes each with six members should be understood:
(i)	six bases;
(ii)	six doors;
(iii)	six objects;
(iv)	six types of consciousness;
(v)	six processes; and
(vi)	sixfold presentation of objects.
|4.3
The presentation of objects to the process-freed consciousness is threefold, namely. kamma, sign of kamma, and sign of destiny.
|4.4
The bases, doors, and objects therein are as described before.
|
§3 Six Types of Consciousness
|4.5
The six types of consciousness are: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-cosciousness, and mind-consciousness.
|
§4 Six Processes
`151
|4.6
According to the doors the six cognitive processes are:
the process connected with the eye door;
the process connected with the ear door;
the process connected with the nose door;
the process connected with the tongue door;
the process connected with the body door; and
the process connected with the mind door.
Or, according to consciousness, the cognitive processes are:
(i)	the process connected with eye-consciousness;
(ii)	the process connected with ear-consciousness;
(iii)	the process connected with nose-consciousness;
(iv)	the process connected with tongue-consciousness;
(v)	the process connected with body-consciousness; and
(vi)	the process connected with mind-consciousness.
The cognitive processes connected with the doors should be coordinated (with the corresponding consciousness).
|
Guide to §4
The six cognitive processes: The word vlthi literally means street,
but here it is used in the sense of process. When cittas arise cognizing
an object at the sense doors or the mind door, they do not occur at ran-
dom or in isolation, but as phases in a series of discrete cognitive events
leading one to the other in a regular and uniform order. This order is
called cittaniyama, the fixed order of consciousness.
For a cognitive process to occur, all the essential conditions must be
present. According to the Commentaries, the essential conditions for each
type of process are as follows:
For an	eye-door process:
(a)	eye-sensitivity (cakkhuppasada);
(b)	visible object (rnpcirammcina);
(c)	light (aloka);
(d)	attention {manasikara).
For an	ear-door process:
(a)	ear-sensitivity (sotappasada);
(b)	sound (saddarammana);
(c)	space (akasa);
(d)	attention.
`152
(iii)	For a nose-door process:
(a)	nose-sensitivity (ghcmappasada);
(b)	smell (gandha rammana);
(c)	air element (vayodhatu);
(d)	attention.
(iv)	For a tongue-door process:
(a)	tongue-sensitivity (jivhappasada);
(b)	taste (rasarammana);
(c)	water element (apodhatu);
(d)	attention.
(v)	For a body-door process:
(a)	body-sensitivity (kayappasada);
(b)	tangible object {phottlmbbarammana);
(c)	earth element (pathavJdhcitu);
(d)	attention.
(vi)	For a mind-door process:
(a)	the heart-base (hadayavatthu);
(b)	mental object (dhammarammana);
(c)	the bhavanga;
(d)	attention.1
The six types of cognitive processes are conveniently divided into
two groups—the five-door process (paiicadvaravlthi), which includes the
five processes occurring at each of the physical sense doors; and the
mind-door process {manodvaravlthi)^ which comprises all processes that
occur solely at the mind door. Since the bhavanga is also the channel
from which the five-door processes emerge, the latter are sometimes
called mixed door processes (missaka-dvaravlthi) as they involve both
the mind door and a physical sense door. The processes that occur solely
at the mind door are then called bare mind-door processes {suddha-mano-
dvaravlthi) since they emerge from the bhavanga alone without the in-
strumentality of a physical sense door. As will be seen, the first five
processes all follow a uniform pattern despite the difference in the sense
faculty, while the sixth comprises a variety of processes which are alike
only in that they occur independently of the external sense doors.
§5 Sixfold Presentation of Objects
`153
|4.7
The sixfold presentation of objects should be understood as follows:
a.At the five sense doors, it is: (i) very great, (ii) great, (iii) slight, (iv) very slight.
b.At the mind door, it is: (v) clear and (vi) obscure.
|
Guide to §5
Presentation of objects: The Pali expression visayappavatti means
the presentation of an object to consciousness at one of the six doors,
or the occurrence of states of consciousness upon the presentation of an
object. The sixfold presentation of objects is analyzed into four alterna-
tives at the five sense doors—very great, great, slight, and very slight;
and two alternatives at the mind door—clear and obscure.
In this context the words “great” {maha) and “slight” (paritta) are
not used with reference to the size or grossness of the object, but to the
force of its impact on consciousness. Even though a large or gross vis-
ible object is present at the eye door, if the sensitive matter of the eye
is weak, or the object impinges on the eye after it has passed its prime,
or the light is dim, the object will not make a distinct impression and
thus will fall into the categories of slight or very slight. On the other
hand, if a small or subtle form impinges on the eye while it is at its prime,
ana tne sensitive inaaer or tne eye is strong, ana me ngnt is ongnt, men
the object will make a distinct impression and will fall into the catego-
ries of great or very great.
Therefore the terms “great object” and “slight object,” etc., indicate,
not the size of the object, but the number of process cittas (vlthicitta)
that arise from the moment the object enters the avenue of a sense door
until the moment the presentation of the object to consciousness ceases.
A similar principle distinguishes the presentation of objects in the mind
door into the clear and the obscure.
The Five-Door Process
[pancadvara vithl)
§6 The Very Great Object
`154
|4.8
How (is the intensity in the presentation of objects determined)?
One mind-moment consists of the three (sub-) moments —arising, presence, and dissolution.
|4.9
The duration of material phenomena consists of seventeen such mind-moments.
|4.10
The five sense objects enter the avenue of the five sense doors at the stage of presence, when one or several mind-moments have passed.
Therefore, if a visible form as object, having passed one mind-moment (i), 
enters the avenue of the eye, the life-continuum vibrates for two mind-moments and is arrested (ii, iii). 
Then a five-door adverting consciousness arises and ceases adverting to that same visible form as object (iv). 
Immediately after there arise and cease in due order:
(v)	eye-consciousness seeing that form;
(vi)	receiving consciousness receiving it;
(vii)	investigating consciousness investigating it;
(viii)	determining consciousness determining it.
Following this, any one of the twenty-nine sense-sphere javanas which has gained the right conditions runs its course, generally for seven mind-moments (ix-xv). After the javanas, two registration resultants arise accordingly (xvi-xvii). Then comes the subsidence into the life-continuum.
|
`155
TABLE 4.1: A COMPLETE EYE-DOOR PROCESS
`156
|4.11
To this extent seventeen mind-moments are completed, namely, fourteen acts of process consciousness, two vibrations of the life-continuum, and one mind-moment that had passed prior to (the process). Then the object ceases. This object is called “very great.”
|
Guide to §6
The duration of material phenomena: The life-span of a citta is
termed, in the Abhidhamma, a mind-moment {cittakkhana). This is a
temporal unit of such brief duration that, according to the commenta-
tors, in the time that it takes for lightning to flash or the eyes to blink,
billions of mind-moments can elapse. Nevertheless, though seemingly
infinitesimal, each mind-moment in turn consists of three sub-moments —
arising (uppada), presence (thiti), and dissolution (bhanga). Within the
breadth of a mind-moment, a citta arises, performs its momentary func-
tion, and then dissolves, conditioning the next citta in immediate suc-
cession. Thus, through the sequence of mind-moments, the flow of
consciousness continues uninterrupted like the waters in a stream.
Some commentators, such as Acariya Ananda (author of the Mula-
Tika to the Abhidhamma Pitaka), reject the sub-moment of presence in
relation to mental phenomena, appealing for support to the Citta-Yamaka
chapter of the Yamaka, which speaks only of the arising moment and
dissolution moment of consciousness, but not of a presence moment.
Acariya Anuruddha, however, does not endorse this position, nor do his
commentators. The VibhavinI points out that the sub-moment of pres-
ence is a stage in the occurrence of a dhamma separate from the stages
of arising and dissolution, during which the dhamma “stands facing its
own dissolution” {bhangabhimukhavatha). Ledi Sayadaw regards the
moment of presence as the midpoint between the two phases of arising
and falling (udaya-vaya), just as, when a stone is thrown upwards, a
moment is needed before it starts falling downwards. He also says that
the presence moment can be taken to cover the entire life-span of a
dhamma between the first point of its arising and the end of its falling
away. Many commentators take the presence moment to be implied by
the Buddha’s statement: “There are three conditioned characteristics of
the conditioned: arising, passing away, and the alteration of that which
stands”（A.3:47/i, 152). Here the presence moment is identified with “the
alteration of that which stands” (thitassa annathatta).
Material phenomena as well pass through the same three stages of
arising, presence, and dissolution, but for them the time required for these
three stages to elapse is equal to the time it takes for seventeen cittas to
arise and perish. The stages of arising and dissolution are equal in
`157
duration for both material and mental phenomena, but in the case of ma-
terial phenomena the stage of presence is equal to forty-nine sub-mo-
ments of mental phenomena.2
The five sense objects enter ... at the stage of presence: The five
sense objects —visible forms, etc. —are material phenomena and thus
endure for seventeen mind-moments. Since the sense object is still weak
at the sub-moment of arising, it can enter the avenue of sense only when
it reaches the stage of presence.
Therefore, if a visible form as object, etc.: When no active cogni-
tive process is taking place, the bhavanga flows on as a series of cittas
all of the same type, hanging on to a single object—either a kamma, a
sign of kamma, or a sign of destiny—the same as the object of the last
javana process in the immediately preceding existence. At the very
moment a sense object enters a sense door, one bhavanga citta passes,
known as atlta-bhavanga, the past life-continuum. Then another two
bhavanga cittas vibrate owing to the impact of the object, the second
interrupting the stream of the bhavanga. In the sub-commentaries these
are distinguished as bhavanga-calanci, vibrational life-continuum, and
bhavang, -upaccheda, arrest life-continuum. Thereafter, with the arising
of the five-door adverting citta, the stream of consciousness emerges from
the “process-freed” state and launches into a cognitive process (vJthipcita).
The twenty-nine sense-sphere javanas: that is, twelve unwholesome
types, eight each of the great wholesome and great functional types, and
seven occasions of the javana process.
This object is called t4very great”： In the process with a very great
object, the object arises simultaneously with the arising sub-moment of
the atlta-bhavanga. Since the sense object and the sensitive matter of
the sense organ both have a duration of seventeen mind-moments, they
both perish simultaneously with the second registration citta. Thus this
kind of cognitive process runs for a full seventeen mind-moments, of
which fourteen cittas, beginning with the five-door adverting citta, are
considered process cittas proper. This cognitive process is also known
as tadarammanavcira, a course ending with registration. (See Table 4.1.)
The connection of the cognitive process described in the text with
the “six sixes” may be understood as follows. When a visible form im-
pinges on the eye-sensitivity, then, supported by the eye-base, there arises
an eye-consciousness taking as object the visible form that has impinged
on the eye. For the eye-consciousness, the eye-sensitivity is the base
and the door, the visible form is the object. The other cittas in the
process—the five-door adverting, the receiving, investigating, and
determining consciousnesses, the javanas, and registration —are states
`158
or mina-consciousness. iney taKe tne same visiDie rorm as oDjecr ana
the eye-sensitivity as door, but they arise with the support of the heart-
base. For all the cittas in the process, the bhavanga is also considered a
door, since the entire process emerges from the bhavanga. Thus all sense-
door processes are considered to have two doors, the material sensitiv-
ity as a differentiating door and the mind door or bhavanga as a common
door. Because it has arisen specifically in the eye door this process is
called an “eye-door process,” and because it is distinguished by eye-con-
sciousness it is also called an “eye-consciousness process.” Since it has
arisen with a very powerful object capable of impinging on the sense
faculty after only one mind-moment has passed, it is called a process
with a very great object. The cognitive processes in the other senses may
be understood accordingly, with the necessary substitutions.
The ancient teachers of the Abhidhamma illustrate the cognitive proc-
ess occurring in the sense doors with the simile of the mango.3 A cer-
tain man with his head covered went to sleep at the foot of a fruiting
mango tree. Then a ripe mango loosened from the stalk fell to the ground,
grazing his ear. Awakened by the sound, he opened his eyes and looked;
then he stretched out his hand, took the fruit, squeezed it, and smelt it.
Having done so, he ate the mango, swallowed it appreciating its taste,
and then went back to sleep.
Here, the time of the man’s sleeping at the foot of the mango tree is
like the time when the bhavanga is occurring. The instant of the ripe
mango falling from its stalk and grazing his ear is like the instant of the
object striking one of the sense organs, for instance, the eye. The time
of awaking through the sound is like that of the five-door adverting
consciousness turning towards the object. The time of the man’s open-
ing his eyes and looking is like eye-consciousness accomplishing its
function of seeing. The time of stretching out his hand and taking the
mango is like that of the receiving consciousness receiving the object.
The time of squeezing the fruit is like that of the investigating con-
sciousness investigating the object. The time of smelling the mango is
like that of the determining consciousness determining the object. The
time of eating the mango is like that of javana experiencing the flavour
of the object. The swallowing of the fruit while appreciating its taste is
like the registration consciousness taking the same object as the javana
phase. And the man’s going back to sleep is like the subsidence back
into the bhavanga.
It should be noted that the entire cognitive process occurs without
any self or subject behind it as an enduring experiencer or inner con-
troller, a “knower” outside the scope of the process itself. The momen-
tary cittas themselves exercise all the functions necessary to cognition,
`159
and the unity of the cognitive act derives from their coordination through
laws of conditional connectedness. Within the cognitive process each
citta comes into being in accordance with the lawful order of conscious-
ness (cittaniyama). It arises in dependence on a variety of conditions, 
including the preceding citta, the object, a door, and a physical base.
Having arisen, it performs its own unique function within the process,
and then it dissolves, becoming a condition for the next citta.
§7 The Great Object
|4.12
The object is called “great” when it enters the avenue of sense after having passed (a few moments) and is unable to survive till the arising of the registration mind-moments. In that case, at the end of the javanas, there is subsidence into the life-continuum and no arising of registration consciousness.
|
Guide to §7
The object is called “great, ” etc.: In this kind of cognitive process,
after the object has arisen two or three atlta-bhavanga cittas pass be-
fore its impact causes the bhavanga to vibrate. Since the object and sense
door can only endure for seventeen mind-moments, this process does
not give any scope for the registration cittas to arise; registration can-
not occur even when there are two atlta-bhavangas, since registration
occurs either for two mind-moments or not at all.
When there are two atlta-bhavanga cittas, fifteen more cittas can arise
during the life-span of the object. In such a case both the object and the
sense door perish simultaneously with the dissolution moment of the first
bhavanga citta following the javana phase. When there are three atlta-
bhavanga cittas, scope remains for fourteen more cittas to arise, and in
this case the sense object and sense door perish simultaneously with the
last javana citta. This kind of cognitive process is also called a javana-
vara, a course ending with javana.
`160
TABLE 4.2: GRADES OF SENSE-DOOR PROCESSES
§8 The Slight Object
|4.13
The object is called “slight” when it enters the avenue of sense after having passed (a few moments) and is unable to survive till the arising of the javanas. In that case even the javanas do not arise, but the determining consciousness occurs for two or three moments, and then there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
|
Guide to §8
The object is called “slight, ” etc.: In the process with a slight ob-
ject, from four to nine atlta-bhavangas will pass initially, and no javanas
will arise. The determining citta will occur two or three times, after which
the cognitive process will subside into the bhavanga. Depending on the
number of atlta-bhavangas there are six types of process with a slight
object. This kind of process is also called votthapanavara, a course end-
ing with determining.
§9 The Very Slight Object
|4.14
The object is called “very slight” when it enters the avenue of sense as it is on the verge of ceasing and, after having passed (a few moments), is unable to survive until the arising of the determining consciousness. In that case there is merely vibration of the life-continuum, but no arising of a cognitive process.
|
Guide to §9
The object is called “very slight, ” etc.: In this course of cognition
there are no process cittas but only vibrations of the bhavanga. During
the seventeen moments of the object’s life-span, ten to fifteen moments
will be occupied by atlta-bhavanga cittas, two moments by vibrational
bhavangas, and the rest by the bhavangas subsequent to the vibration.
This type of process, of which there are six sub-types, is also termed
moghavara, the futile course.
`161
KEY: B = stream of bhavanga; P = past bhavanga; V = vibrational bhavanga; A = arrest bhavanga; F = five-door adverting;
E = eye-consciousness; Rc = receiving; I = investigation; D = determining; J = javana; Rg = registration; { } = the life of the object.
NOTE: For eye-consciousness, substitute ear-, nose-, tongue-, or body-consciousness. All fifteen types of cognitive process can occur through
each of the five doors, making a total of seventy-five processes occuring at the five sense doors.
`162
§10 Fourfold Presentation of Objects
|4.15
As in the eye door, so in the ear door, etc. Thus in all the five doors, the fourfold presentation of objects should be understood, in due order, in the four ways known as:
the course (ending with) registration;
the course (ending with) javana;
the course (ending with) determining; and
the futile course.
|
Guide to §10
Thus in all the five doors, etc.: When these four courses are divided
by way of their sub-types, there are altogether fifteen kinds of sense-
door cognitive process. Since each of these can occur in all the five sense
doors, this makes a total of seventy-five sense-door processes. (See Table
4.2.)
§11 Summary
|4.16
There are seven modes and fourteen different states of consciousness in the cognitive process. In detail there are accordingly fifty-four in the five doors.
Herein, this is the method of the cognitive process in the five sense doors.
|
Guide to §11
There are seven modes, etc.: The seven modes in which the proc-
ess cittas occur are: five-door adverting, sense consciousness (one of
five), receiving, investigating, determining, javana and registration. The
fourteen states of consciousness are obtained by taking the javana seven
times and registration twice. The fifty-four cittas that occur in the five-
door process comprise all the sense-sphere cittas.
`163
The Mind-Door Process
(manodvara vithi)
§12 The Limited Javana Process
|4.17
When a clear object enters the avenue of the mind door, then the vibration of the life-continuum, mind-door adverting, javanas, and at the end of the javanas, registration resultants, all take place. Following this there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
|4.18
In the case of an obscure object there is subsidence into the life-continuum at the end of the javanas, without giving rise to the registration resultants.
|
Guide to §12
The mind-door process: When a cognitive process occurs in one of
the sense doors, two doors are actually involved: the physical sense door
and the mind door, which is the bhavanga from which the cognitive
process emerges. What is called a mind-door process is a cognitive proc-
ess that occurs exclusively through the mind door, without any admix-
ture of the sense doors. This kind of process is also called, for the sake
of clarity, a bare mind-door process (suddha-manodvaravithi).
The mind-door process includes both the “limited” or sense-sphere
process (paritta-vithi), dealt with in §§12-13, and the cognitive process
in absorption pertaining to the sublime (mahaggata) and supramundane
(lokuttara) attainments, dealt with in §§14-16.
The limited or sense-sphere mind-door process is itself twofold:
(1)that consequent to a five-door process (paficadvaranubandhaka), and
(2)the independent process (visumsiddha).
(1) Just as when a gong is struck once by a baton, the gong sends
forth a continuous stream of reverberations, so when one of the five sense
doors has been impinged upon once by a sense object, after the five-
door process has ceased the past sense object comes into range at the
mind door and sets off many sequences of mind-door processes. Because
these cognitive processes come as the sequel to a five-door process, they
`164
are Known as consequem processes, i ney are countea as nveroia Dy way
of the five sense-door processes which they follow.
Ledi Sayadaw explains that it is in these consequent processes that
distinct recognition of the object occurs; such recognition does not oc-
cur in a bare five-door process itself. An eye-door process, for exam-
ple, is followed first by a conformational mind-door process
(tcidanuvattika manodvaravlthi), which reproduces in the mind door
the object just perceived in the sense-door process. Then comes a
process grasping the object as whole (samudayagahikci); then a proc-
ess recognizing the colour (vannasallakkhana); then a process grasping
the entity (vatthugahika); then a process recognizing the entity (vatthu
sallakkhana); then a process grasping the name (namagahika); then a
process recognizing the name (namasallakkhana).
“The process grasping the object as a whole” is the mind-door
process perceiving as a whole the forms repeatedly perceived in indi-
vidual frames by the two preceding processes, the original sense-door
process and the conformational mind-door process. This process exer-
cises a synthesizing function, fusing the perception of distinct “shots”
of the object into the perception of a unity, as in the case of a whirling
fire-brand perceived as a circle of fire. It is only when this has occurred
that recognition of the colour is possible. When the recognition of the
colour occurs, one recognizes the colour, “I see blue.” When the recog-
nition of the entity occurs, one recognizes the entity or shape. When the
recognition of the name occurs, one recognizes the name. Thus, Ledi
Saydaw asserts, it is only when a recognitional process referring to one
or another specific feature occurs that one knows, “I see this or that
specific feature.”
(2) An independent mind-door process occurs when any of the six
objects enters the range of cognition entirely on its own, not as a con-
sequence of an immediately preceding sense-door process. The question
may be raised how an object can enter the range of the mind door inde-
pendently of a proximate sensory impingement. Ledi Sayadaw cites
various sources: through what was directly perceived earlier, or by in-
ference from what was directly perceived; through what was learnt by
oral report, or by inference from what was learnt by oral report; on ac-
count of belief, opinion, reasoning, or reflective acceptance of a view;
by the power of kamma, psychic power, disturbance of the bodily
humours, the influence of a deity, comprehension, realization, etc. He
explains that if one has clearly experienced an object even once, at a
later time—even after a hundred years or in a future life—dependent
on that object a condition may be set for the vibration of the bhavanga.
The mind that has been nurtured on such an input of prior experiences
`165
is extremely susceptible to their influence. When it encounters any sense
object, that object may trigger off in a single moment mental waves
extending to many thousands of objects previously perceived.
The mental continuum, constantly being excited by these causal in-
fluences, is always seeking an opportunity to emerge from the bhavanga
and acquire a clear cognition of an object. Therefore the mental factor
of attention present in the bhavanga repeatedly causes the bhavanga to
vibrate, and it directs consciousness again and again to advert to objects
which have gained conditions to appear. Even though the bhavanga citta
has its own object, Ledi Sayadaw explains, it occurs in the mode of in-
clining towards some other object. As a result of this perpetual “buzz”
of activity in the bhavanga, when an object acquires sufficient promi-
nence through other operative conditions, it draws the continuum of
consciousness out of the bhavanga, and then that object comes into the
range of cognition at the mind door.
The independent process is analyzed as sixfold: the process based on
what was directly perceived; the process based on inference from what
was directly perceived; the process based on oral report; the process based
on inference from oral report; the process based on the cognized; the
process based on inference from the cognized. “The cognized” here in-
cludes belief, opinion, comprehension, and realization; “inference from
the cognized” includes judgements arrived at by inductive and deduc-
tive reasoning.
When a clear object enters, etc.: There are two types of mind-door
process pertaining to the sense sphere, distinguished by the intensity of
the object. In a process with a clear object (vibhutalambana), when the
object enters the avenue of the mind door, the bhavanga vibrates and is
arrested. Then a mind-door adverting consciousness turns to the object,
followed by seven moments of javana and two of registration, after which
the cognitive process subsides into the bhavanga. This is in the case of
beings in the sense-sphere plane; but for beings in the fine-material and
immaterial planes, moments of registration do not occur even when the
object is exceptionally clear (see below §§19-20).
In the case of an obscure object: In the process with an obscure
object (avibhutalamband) the two moments of registration do not occur
under any conditions.
Ledi Sayadaw holds that the subsidence into the bhavanga at the end
of the javanas should be understood as the maximum type of process
with an obscure object. However, he maintains that when the object is
obscure, a course ending with two or three occurrences of the mind-door
adverting is also found, and a course ending with the mere vibration of
the bhavanga may also be admitted. For in the case of the bare mind-door
`166
TABLE 4.3: THE LIMITED JAVANA PROCESS
The Clear Object
B { V A M J J J J J J J Rg Rg } B
The Obscure Object
B{VAMJJJJJJJ}BB B
KEY: M = mind-door adverting; {} = extent of the process; rest as in Table 4.2.
process, on countless occasions an object enters the range of cognition
and causes the bhavanga to vibrate two or three times, after which the
disturbance subsides with no occurrence of cittas belonging to a cogni-
tive process proper. Thus, according to Ledi Sayadaw, in the mind door
too there is a fourfold presentation of objects. The course ending with
registration can be called a very clear (ati-vibhuta) presentation; the
course ending with javanas, a clear (vibhnta) presentation; the course
ending with mind-door adverting, an obscure (avibhiita) presentation;
and the course ending with mere vibration of the bhavanga, a very ob-
scure (ati-avibhiita) presentation. The clarity of the presentation depends
on either the prominence of the object or the strength of consciousness.
For a prominent object can appear clearly even when consciousness is
weak, while a strong consciousness can clearly cognize even a subtle
abstruse object.

§13 Summary
|4.19
Three modes and ten different states (of consciousness) in the cognitive process are told. It should be explained that, in detail, there are forty-one kinds here.
Herein, this is the limited javana section.
|
Guide to §13
Three modes, etc.: The three modes of the process cittas are mind-
door adverting, javana, and registration. The ten states of consciousness
are obtained by taking the javana seven times and registration twice. The
forty-one cittas here include all the sense-sphere cittas except the two
sets of fivefold sense consciousness, the five-door adverting, and the two
`167
kinds of receiving consciousness. The three investigating cittas occur
here with the function of registration, the determining citta the func-
tion of mind-door adverting.
The Process of Absorption Javanas in the Mind Door
{appanajavana-manodvaravithi)
§14 The Process of Absorption
|4.20
In the occurrence of javanas in absorption, there is no distinction between clear and obscure (objects). Likewise there is no arising of registration consciousness.
|4.21
In this case (i.e. in the process of absorption), any one of the eight sense-sphere javanas accompanied by knowledge arises and ceases four times or three times, in due order as preparation, access, conformity, and change-of-lineage. Immediately after they cease, in the fourth or fifth moment as the case may be, any one of the javanas among the twenty-six types of sublime or supramundane javanas enters upon the process of absorption in accordance with the way the mind is conveyed. After that, at the end of absorption, there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
|
Guide to §14
Absorption (appana): Appanci primarily signifies a highly developed
form of vitakka, initial application of mind, which thrusts the associ-
ated mental states so deeply into the object that they become absorbed
in it. Although vitakka is absent in the jhanas beyond the first, because
the mind that has entered jhana becomes fixed one-pointedly on its ob-
ject, the word appanci comes to be extended to all meditative attainments
pertaining to the fine-material, immaterial, and supramundane planes.
There is no distinction between clear and obscure (objects): This
distinction is not found in relation to absorption because the meditative
attainments are only possible when the object is clearly apprehended.
`168
In this case ... any one of the eight sense-sphere javanas ... arises:
When the meditator is about to achieve a jhana, a path, or fruition, first
there arises mind-door adverting. Then, in the same cognitive process
as the attainment, immediately preceding it, a series of sense-sphere
javanas runs its course in quick succession, leading the mind from the
sense-sphere plane to the absorption. In the case of a worldling or a
trainee, these javanas will be one of the four wholesome sense-sphere
cittas accompanied by knowledge; in the case of an Arahant, one of the
four functional sense-sphere cittas accompanied by knowledge.
In due order as preparation, etc.: In an individual with average
faculties, these preliminary javanas occur four times, each one exercis-
ing a different preliminary function. The first is called preparation (pari-
kamma) because it prepares the mental continuum for the attainment to
follow. The next is called access (upacara) because it arises in proxim-
ity to the attainment. The third moment is called conformity (anuloma)
because it arises in conformity with both the preceding moments and
the subsequent absorption. The fourth moment is called change-of-line-
age (gotrabhii). In the case of jhana attainment it receives this name be-
cause it overcomes the sense-sphere lineage and evolves the lineage of
sublime consciousness. In the case of the first path attainment, this mo-
ment is called change-of-lineage because it marks the transition from
the lineage of worldlings to the lineage of the noble ones (ariya). The
expression continues to be used figuratively for the moment of transi-
tion to the higher paths and truits, though sometimes it is designated by
a different name, vodana, meaning “cleansing.”4
In an individual with especially keen faculties, the moment of prepa-
ration (parikamma) is omitted, and thus only three preliminary sense-
sphere javanas occur prior to absorption.
Immediately after they cease, etc.: Immediately after the change-
of-lineage citta, as the fourth javana in an individual with keen facul-
ties, or as the fifth javana in one with average faculties, there arises the
first javana citta at the level of absorption. This citta may be one of the
five fine-material-sphere cittas either wholesome or functional (10), one
of the four immaterial-sphere cittas either wholesome or functional (8), 
or one of the four paths or fruits (8). Thus it can be of twenty-six types.
It should be noted that in an absorption cognitive process, the javana
cittas can be of different types, even of different planes, while in a sense-
sphere process they are all uniform.
In accordance with the way the mind is conveyed {yathabhi-
niharavasena): This means that the absorption citta that arises is con-
ditioned by the direction the meditator gives to his mind. If he wishes
to attain the first jhana, then he conveys his mind towards that jhana
`169
through the development of calm concentration (samatha), and so too
for the attainment of the higher jhanas. If the meditator aims at reach-
ing the path and fruit, then he conveys his mind towards the path and
fruit through the development of insight (vipassana).
At the end of absorption: After absorption there is immediate sub-
sidence into the bhavanga, with no occurrence of registration cittas.
TABLE 4.4: THE ABSORPTION JAVANA PROCESS
The Initial Attainment of Jhana
Avrg: B { V A M Pr Ac Cn Ch Jh } B B B
Keen: B { V A M Ac Cn Ch Jh } B B B B
Attainment of Path and Fruit
Avrg: B { V A M Pr Ac Cn Ch Pa Fr Fr } B
Keen: B { V A M Ac Cn Ch Pa Fr Fr Fr } B
KEY: Avrg = one of average faculties; keen = one of keen faculties; Pr = preparation;
Ac = access; Cn = conformity; Ch = change-of-lineage; Jh = jhana; Pa = path; Fr = fruition;
rest as in Tables 4.2 and 4.3.
§15 Correlations in Absorption
|4.22
Therein, immediately after a javana accompanied by joy, absorption accompanied by joy may be expected. Immediately after a javana accompanied by equanimity, absorption (occurs) accompanied by equanimity.
Therein, too, immediately after a wholesome javana, absorption occurs through a wholesome javana and the three lower fruits. Immediately after a functional javana, absorption occurs through a functional javana and the fruit of Arahantship.
|
Guide to §15
The purpose of this passage is to establish the correlations between
the preliminary cittas of the cognitive process issuing in absorption and
the absorption cittas themselves. The verses to follow will provide the
detailed application of the general principles stated in the present passage.
`170
§16 Summary
|4.23
Following wholesome consciousness accompanied by joy, thirty-two (classes of absorption javanas) arise. After (wholesome consciousness) accompanied by equanimity, twelve (classes of absorption javanas arise). 
|4.24
After functionals accompanied by joy, eight classes arise, and after (functionals) accompanied by equanimity, six classes arise.
For worldlings and trainees, absorption occurs following a three-rooted wholesome sense-sphere consciousness. For those free from lust (i.e. Arahants), absorption follows a three-rooted sense-sphere functional consciousness.
Herein, this is the method of the cognitive process in the mind door.
|
Guide to §16
Following wholesome consciousness accompanied by joy, etc.:
When the preliminary functions in the absorption process are performed
by either of the two wholesome sense-sphere cittas accompanied by joy
and knowledge—that is, in the case of worldlings or trainees—then there
can arise thirty-two cittas as javanas in absorption: the sublime whole-
some cittas of the first four jhanas (those accompanied by happiness);
the four path cittas at the level of any of the first four jhanas; and the
lower three fruition cittas at the same four levels (4 + 16+12 = 32).
After (wholesome consciousness) accompanied by equanimity, etc.:
When the preliminary functions are performed by either of the two
wholesome sense-sphere cittas accompanied by equanimity and knowl-
edge—also in the case of worldlings or trainees—then there can arise
twelve absorption javanas: the sublime wholesome cittas of the fifth jhana
and the four immaterial jhanas; the four path cittas at the level of the
fifth jhana; and the lower three fruition cittas at the level of the fifth
jhana (5 + 4 + 3 = 12).
`171
After functionals accompanied by joy, etc.: Following the two func-
tional sense-sphere cittas accompanied by joy and knowledge—that is,
in the case of Arahants only—there arise eight javanas in absorption:
the sublime functional javanas of the first four jhanas and the fruition
of Arahantship at the level of the first four jhanas (4 + 4 = 8).
After (functionals) accompanied by equanimity, etc.: Following
the two functional sense-sphere cittas accompanied by equanimity and
knowledge there arise six javanas in absorption: five sublime functional
javanas and the fruition of Arahantship at the level of the fifth jhana
(5 + 1 = 6).
For worldlings and trainees, etc.: In the case of worldlings and
trainees who have attained the three lower paths and fruits, after any
of the four wholesome sense-sphere javanas accompanied by knowl-
edge there arises one of the forty-four absorption javanas described
above (32 + 12 = 44). After the four functional sense-sphere javanas
accompanied by knowledge, there arises to the Arahant one of the above
fourteen absorption javanas (8 + 6 = 14).
The Procedure of Registration
(tadarammananiyama)
§17 Analysis of Registration
|4.25
Here, under all circumstances, when an object is undesirable, the fivefold sense consciousness, reception, investigation, and registration (that arise) are unwholesome-resultants.
|4.26
When (the object is) desirable, they are wholesome-resultants.
|4.27
If the object is extremely desirable, investigation and registration are accompanied by joy.
In this connection, too, at the end of functional javanas accompanied by joy, there arise registration mind-moments also accompanied by joy.
At the end of functional javanas accompanied by equanimity, the registration mind-moments are also accompanied by equanimity.
|
`172
Guide to §17
When an object is undesirable, etc.: Sense objects are distinguished
into three classes: the undesirable (anittha), the moderately desirable
(ittha, also called itthamajjhatta, desirable-neutral), and the extremely
desirable (ati-ittha). While the desirable object is thus subdivided into
two, all undesirable objects are comprised within a single class called
simply “the undesirable•”
According to the Abhidhamma philosophy, this distinction in the
quality of objects pertains to the intrinsic nature of the object itself; it
is not a variable determined by the individual temperament and prefer-
ences of the experiencer. The Sammohavinodanl, the commentary to the
Vibhanga, contends that when a person considers a desirable object to
be undesirable, or an undesirable object to be desirable, he does so due
to a perversion of perception (sannavipallasa). The object itself, how-
ever, remains inherently desirable or undesirable independently of the
perceiver’s personal preferences. The Sammohavinodanl states that the
distinction between the intrinsically desirable and undesirable obtains
by way of the average being (majjhima-satta): “It is distinguishable
according to what is found desirable at one time and undesirable at an-
other time by average (men such as) accountants, government officials, 
burgesses, land owners and merchants.”5
Whether on a given occasion one experiences an undesirable, a mod-
erately desirable, or an extremely desirable object is governed by one’s
past kamma. Thus the object experienced provides the opportunity for
kamma to ripen in the form of resultant states of consciousness
(vipakacitta). The resultant cittas accord with the nature of the object
spontaneously, without deliberation, just as a facial reflection in a mir-
ror accords with the features of the face.
Through the force of unwholesome kamma one encounters an unde-
sirable object, and thus the resultant cittas in the cognitive process by
which that object is cognized will be generated by the maturation of that
unwholesome kamma. In this case the sense consciousness, reception,
investigation, and registration cittas are necessarily unwholesome-
resultants (akusalavipaka). The accompanying feeling is always equa-
nimity (upekkha、, except in the case of body-consciousness, which is
accompanied by pain.
Conversely, a desirable-neutral or a very desirable object is encoun-
tered through the force of wholesome kamma, and the resultant cittas
in the cognitive process will be generated by the maturation of that
wholesome kamma. In this case the same four resultant positions will
be occupied by wholesome-resultants (kusalavipcika). These cittas will
generally be accompanied by equanimity, except that body-consciousness
`173
is accompanied by pleasure and, in the experience of an extremely de-
sirable object, investigation and registration are accompanied by joy.
When the object is undesirable, the function of registration is exer-
cised exclusively by the unwholesome-resultant investigating conscious-
ness. Registration in regard to a moderately desirable object is exercised
by the wholesome-resultant investigating consciousness accompanied by
equanimity or by one of the four great resultants accompanied by equa-
nimity. When the object is very desirable, registration is generally per-
formed by the investigating consciousness accompanied by joy or by
one of the four great resultants accompanied by joy.
It should be noted that while the resultant cittas are governed by the
nature of the object, the javanas are not, but vary in accordance with
the temperament and proclivities of the experiencer. Even when the object
is extremely desirable, the javanas may occur in the mode of indiffer-
ence as wholesome or unwholesome cittas accompanied by equanim-
ity; for example, at the sight of the Buddha a skeptic may experience
cittas accompanied by doubt, while at the sight of a beautiful woman a
meditative monk may experience wholesome cittas accompanied by
knowledge and equanimity. It is even possible for javanas accompanied
by aversion and displeasure to arise towards a very desirable object.
Again, towards an undesirable object, the javanas may occur in the mode
normally appropriate for a desirable object. Thus a masochist may re-
spond to physical pain with cittas rooted in greed and accompanied by
joy, while a meditative monk may contemplate a decaying corpse with
wholesome cittas accompanied by knowledge and joy.
In this connection, too, etc.: This passage is included to show that
it is not only the resultant cittas that accord with the object but also the
Arahant, s functional sense-sphere javanas. When an Arahant experiences
an extremely desirable object, his javanas occur as one of the four func-
tional cittas accompanied by joy and the registration cittas as one of the
five resultants accompanied by joy. When he experiences an undesirable
or desirable-neutral object, the javanas occur accompanied by equanimity
and the registration cittas as one of the six resultants accompanied by
equanimity.
Ledi Sayadaw points out that this correlation between the object and
the functional javanas of Arahants is stated only with reference to the
natural mode in which their javanas occur. However, with the appropri-
ate mental determination, an Arahant can arouse cittas accompanied by
equanimity towards an extremely desirable object and cittas accompa-
nied by joy towards an undesirable object. Ledi Sayadaw quotes in this
connection the Indriyabhavana Sutta (M.152/iii, 301-302):
`174
Here, Ananda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, there
arises what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there
arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable. If he wishes, he
dwells perceiving what is repulsive as unrepulsive; if he wishes, 
he dwells perceiving what is unrepulsive as repulsive; ... if he
wishes, he avoids both the repulsive and unrepulsive and dwells
in equanimity, mindful and clearly comprehending.
§18 The Adventitious Bhavanga
|4.28
But at the end of javanas accompanied by displeasure, the registration mind-moments and the life-continuum are both accompanied by equanimity. Therefore, in the case of one whose rebirth-consciousness is accompanied by joy, if at the end of javanas accompanied by displeasure there is no occurrence of registration mind-moments, then, the teachers explain, there arises an investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity apprehending any familiar trivial object.
Immediately after that there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
|
Guide to §18
But at the end of javanas accompanied by displeasure, etc.: Be-
cause pleasant feeling and painful feeling are diametrical opposites, cittas
accompanied by the one cannot arise in immediate succession to cittas
accompanied by the other. However, cittas accompanied by either of these
opposed feelings can be immediately preceded or followed by cittas
accompanied by neutral feeling. Thus, when the javanas are accompa-
nied by displeasure (domanassa), i.e. as cittas rooted in hatred, if there
is occasion for registration cittas they must be accompanied by equa-
nimity.6 If there is no scope for registration cittas, javanas accompanied
by displeasure will be followed immediately by the bhavanga only if
the latter is accompanied by equanimous feeling.
Therefore, in the case of one, etc.: For someone whose bhavanga
is one of the four great resultants accompanied by joy, if there are no
`175
registration cittas following a javana process accompanied by displeas-
ure, the last javana citta cannot be followed by an immediate descent
into the bhavanga, owing to the law that cittas with opposite feelings
cannot arise in immediate succession. In such a case, the ancient teach-
ers of the Abhidhamma hold that an investigating consciousness accom-
panied by equanimity occurs for a single mind-moment, serving as a
buffer between the displeasure (= painful mental feeling) of the javana
and the joy (= pleasant mental feeling) of the bhavanga. On such an
occasion this citta does not perform the function of investigating. It takes
an object different from that of the cognitive process—some unrelated
sense-sphere object with which one is already familiar—and functions
simply to pave the way back to the normal flow of the root bhavanga.
This special citta is termed agantuka-bhavanga, “the adventitious life-
continuum.”
§19 The Law of Registration
|4.29
Likewise, they hold that registration occurs (only) at the end of
sense-sphere javanas, (only) to sense-sphere beings, only when sense-
sphere phenomena become objects.
|
§20 Summary
|4.30
Registration occurs, they say, in connection with clear and very great objects when there is certainty as regards sense-sphere javanas, beings, and objects.
Herein, this is the procedure of registration.
|
The Procedure of Javana
(javananiyama)
`176
§21 Sense-Sphere Javana
|4.31
Among the javanas, in a limited javana process, the sense-sphere javanas run only for seven or six times.
|4.32
But in the case of a feeble process such as at the time of dying, etc., they run only five times.
|4.33
To the Exalted One, at the time of the Twin Miracle and the like, when the procedure is rapid, only four or five occasions of reviewing consciousness occur, they also say.
|
Guide to §21
In a limited javana process: That is, in a sense-sphere cognitive
process, the general rule is for the javanas to run seven times, though if
the object is extremely weak they may run only six times. In the last
javana process preceding death (and, the commentators add, at times such
as fainting) the javanas run only five times, because of the weakness of
the heart-base.
To the Exalted One, etc.: The Twin Miracle {yamakapatihariya) was
a feat of psychic power the Buddha performed on several occasions
during his lifetime, when it helped to inspire others with confidence in
his Enlightenment. By this miracle the Buddha displays his body as
emitting streams of fire and water simultaneously (Pts.i,125) He performs
this feat by entering into the fifth jhana separately, in quick succession,
in the fire kasina and the water kasina, and then determining to display
fire and water issuing forth from his body. After emerging from each
jhana, the Buddha reviews its factors, and he does this by an extremely
rapid javana process which runs for only four or five cittas. While the
Twin Miracle itself is exercised by the fifth-jhana direct-knowledge citta,
the reviewing of the jhana factors is performed by a sense-sphere proc-
ess, the quickest possible in the sense sphere.
§22 Javana in Attainments
`177
|4.34
The sublime javanas for a beginner during the first (cognitive process of) absorption, and the direct-knowledge javanas always, run only once. Then comes subsidence into the life-continuum.
|4.35
The arising of the four paths endures for only one mind-moment.
Thereafter, two or three occasions of fruition consciousness arise according to the case. Then comes subsidence into the life-continuum.
|4.36
At the time of the attainment of cessation, the fourth immaterial javana runs twice and then contacts cessation. 
|4.37
When emerging (from cessation), either the fruition consciousness of non-returning or the 
fruition consciousness of Arahantship arises accordingly for a single occasion. 
When it ceases, there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
|4.38
In the cognitive process of attainments, as in the stream of the life-continuum, there is no fixed procedure regarding the processes. It should be understood that even many (sublime and supramundane)
javanas take place (in immediate succession).
|
Guide to §22
The sublime javanas for a beginner, etc.: During the first cogni-
tive process in the attainment of any of the jhanas, a sublime javana
occurs for only a single occasion owing to its weakness due to the lack
of repetition. The javana of the fifth jhana that performs the role of di-
rect knowledge (abhinna) always occurs for only one occasion, even in
those who have mastered it, because a single occasion is sufficient for
it to accomplish its task.
The arising of the four paths, etc.: Each path consciousness also
lasts for only one mind-moment, during which it accomplishes the aban-
doning of the defilements to be eradicated or attenuated by that particu-
lar path. In an individual with average faculties, the preliminary portion
of the cognitive process of the path includes the moment called prepa-
ration (parikamma); for such a person two fruition cittas arise follow-
ing the path. In an individual with keen faculties the moment of
preparation is bypassed and thus three fruition cittas follow the path.
`178
At the time of the attainment of cessation: Non-returners and
Arahants who have mastery over all fine-material and immaterial jhanas
can, by mental development, enter a meditative attainment in which the
stream of consciousness and its concomitants is temporarily arrested. In
such a state—known as nirodhasamapatti, the attainment of cessation—
all mental activity has ceased, though the body remains alive retaining
its vital heat.
To attain cessation the meditator must enter each jhana, emerge from
it, and contemplate its factors with insight as impermanent, suffering,
and non-self. After reaching the base of nothingness and emerging from
it, the meditator performs certain preparatory tasks, and then resolves
to enter the attainment. Thereupon two cittas of the fourth arupajjhana
arise and cease, after which the stream of consciousness is cut off.
The duration of the attainment is governed by the meditator’s prior
determination, and with training can be extended up to seven days. On
emerging there arises first one moment of fruition consciousness, either
of non-returning or Arahantship, the former in the case of a non-returner,
the latter in the case of an Arahant. Thereafter the mind lapses into the
bhavanga. For details, see IX, §§43-44.
In the cognitive process of attainments, etc.: This is said to show
that in the attainments of jhana and fruition, through practice it is pos-
sible to extend the duration of the absorption. For beginners the attain-
ment occurs for only one javana moment. With practice the attainment
can gradually be increased to two, three, four javanas, etc., while for
those who have achieved mastery over the attainment absorption cittas
occur in unbroken succession for long periods of time, even for days
on end.
§23 Summary
|4.39
It should be known that limited javanas arise seven times, the path and direct knowledge only once, the rest (sublime and supramundane) many times.
Herein, this is the procedure of javanas.
|
`179
Analysis by way of Individuals
(pugga/abheda)
§24 Rootless and Double Rooted
|4.40
Herein, to those with double-rooted and rootless (rebirth consciousness), functional javanas and absorption javanas do not arise. 
|4.41
Likewise, in a blissful plane, resultants accompanied by knowledge also do not arise.
|4.42
But in a woeful plane great resultants dissociated from
knowledge are not found.
|

Guide to §24
Those beings for whom the functions of rebirth, bhavanga, and death
are performed by either of the two types of investigating consciousness
accompanied by equanimity have a rootless (ahetuka) rebirth conscious-
ness. Those for whom these functions are performed by one of the great
resultants dissociated from knowledge have a double-rooted (duhetuka)
rebirth consciousness, the root of non-delusion or wisdom being absent.
In such beings the functional javanas, which are exclusive to Arahants,
cannot arise, nor can such beings attain absorption either by way of jhanas
or the path. Moreover, for beings in the woeful plane, the only cittas
that can perform the role of registration are the three types of rootless
investigating consciousness.
In a blissful plane, such as the human world or the sense-sphere heav-
ens, for those reborn by a relinking citta devoid of wisdom, owing to
the inferiority of the rebirth consciousness three-rooted great resultants
do not arise in the role of registration; for these beings, the registration
cittas are only rootless or double-rooted. In a woeful plane, where the
rebirth consciousness is invariably rootless, even two-rooted great
resultants do not perform the role of registration; only the rootless
resultants can arise in this role.
`180
§25 Triple Rooted
|4.43
Amongst those with triple-rooted (rebirth consciousness), to Arahants, no wholesome or unwholesome javanas arise. 
|4.44
Similarly, to trainees and worldlings, functional javanas do not arise. 
|4.45 
Nor do javanas associated with wrong view and doubt arise to the trainees.
|4.46
To non-returner individuals there are no javanas associated with aversion. 
|4.47
But the supramundane javanas are experienced only by noble ones according to their respective capacities.
|
Guide to §25
Those reborn by a relinking consciousness associated with knowl-
edge are said to have a triple-rooted rebirth (tihetuka). These individuals
may be worldlings, trainees, or Arahants (who have, of course, become
such after taking rebirth, not by virtue of their rebirth consciousness).
At the path of stream-entry, the defilements of wrong views and doubt
are eradicated; thus javanas associated with wrong views or doubt can-
not arise in trainees. Non-returners have eliminated the defilement of
aversion, and therefore no longer experience cittas rooted in aversion.
§26 Summary
|4.48
According to circumstances, it is said, those beyond training experience forty-four classes of consciousness, trainees fifty-six, and the rest fifty-four.
Herein, this is the analysis by way of individuals.
|
Guide to §26
Worldlings with a triple-rooted rebirth consciousness can experience
a maximum of fifty-four cittas: 12 unwholesome + 17 wholesome (mi-
nus the 4 paths) + 23 sense-sphere resultants + 2 adverting.
However, beings arisen in the woeful planes, having a rootless re-
birth consciousness, experience only thirty-seven cittas: 12 unwholesome
+ 8 great wholesome + 15 rootless resultants + 2 adverting. Those taking
`181
rebirth in a happy plane with either a rootless or a double-rooted rebirth
consciousness also experience the four great resultants dissociated from
knowledge, making a total of forty-one. The total of fifty-four for those
with triple roots includes all nine jhanas; this total should, of course, be
reduced for those who lack particular jhanas.
At the path of stream-entry, the defilements of wrong view and doubt
are eradicated; thus the four cittas associated with wrong view and the
one citta accompanied by doubt are eliminated. Stream-enterers and once-
returners can experience the following fifty cittas, inclusive of the jhanas:
7	unwholesome + 17 wholesome + 23 sense-sphere resultants + 2
adverting + 1 fruition; the latter will be either the fruition of stream-
entry or the fruition of once-returning, according to their respective level.
Non-returners, having further eliminated aversion, no longer experience
the two cittas rooted in hatred and experience the fruition of non-return-
ing, a maximum of forty-eight. The fifty-six cittas mentioned in the text
for trainees is arrived at by grouping the three fruitions together and
adding the four path cittas.
Arahants, referred to here as “those beyond training” (asekkha), have
eliminated all defilements and thus no longer experience any unwhole-
some cittas. The forty-four cittas they can experience are: 18 rootless +
8	great functionals + 8 great resultants + 5 fine-material functionals +
4 immaterial functionals + 1 fruition of Arahantship.
These figures are for those in the sense-sohere plane. As the next
section will show, they should be reduced for those in the fine-material
and immaterial planes by subtracting the cittas that cannot arise in those
planes.
For a tabular presentation of §26 and §27 combined, see Table 4.5.
Analysis by way of Planes
{bhOmibheda)
§27 Analysis
|4.49
In the sense-sphere plane all these foregoing cognitive processes occur according to circumstances.
|4.50
In the fine-material-sphere plane (all occur) with the exception of javanas connected with aversion and registration moments.
|4.51
In the immaterial-sphere plane (all occur) with the (further) exception of the first path, fine-material-sphere consciousness, smiling consciousness, and the lower immaterial classes of consciousness.
|
`182
TABLE 4.5: INDIVIDUALS, PLANES, AND CITTAS
Indiv. Type	Sense-Sphere Plane	Rne-Mater. Plane	Immaterial Plane
Woeful Rootless Reb. Consness.	12 unwh., 17 rtls., 8wh. (37)	••••	••••
Blissful Rootless Reb. Consness.	Above + 4 btf. rst. dissoc. knwl. (41)	….	•—
2-rooted Reb. Consness.	Same as above (41)	••••	••••
3-rooted Worldling	Above + 4 btf. rst. assoc, knwl. + 9 sbl. (54)	10 unwh., 11 rtls., 8 SS wh., 9 sbl. wh., 5 sbl. rst. (43)	10 unwh., m-d-ad.,  8 SS wh., 4 sbl. wh., 4 sbl. rst. (27)
Stream-enterer	Above, less 5 unwh., + S.E. frt. (50)	Above, less 5 unwh., + S.E. frt. (39)	Above, less 5 unwh., + S.E. frt. (23)
Once-retumer	Above, but with O.R. frt. (50)	Above, but with O.R. frt. (39)	Above, but with O.R. frt. (23)
Non-retumer	Above, less 2 unwh., with N.R. frt. (48)	Above, but with N.R. frt. (39)	Above, but with N.R. frt. (23)
			
Arahant	18 rtls., 8 SS btf. fnc., 8 SS btf. rst., 9 sbl. fnc., Arh. frt. (44)	12 rtls., 8 SS btf. fnc., 9 sbl. fnc., 5 sbl. rst., Arh. frt. (35)	M-d-ad., 8 SS btf. fnc., 4 sbl. fnc., 4 sbl. rst., Arh. frt. (18)
NOTE: The above classification does not take into account the momentary path cittas,
which mark the attainment of the path.


Guide to §27
In the present passage, “plane” (bhiimi) refers to planes of existence,
not to planes of consciousness. Cittas connected with aversion do not
occur in the fine-material plane because aversion was well suppressed in
the preliminary training for attaining the jhana. Aversion and registration
`183
are also absent in the immaterial plane. Smiling cannot occur without a
physical body. Those reborn into any immaterial realm do not attain the
fine-material-sphere jhanas or lower immaterial-sphere jhanas.
§28 Special Cases
|4.52
In all planes, to those who are devoid of particular sense organs, cognitive processes connected with the corresponding doors do not arise.
|4.53
To the non-percipient beings there is absolutely no cognitive process whatsoever.
|
Guide to §28
To those who are devoid of particular sense organs: Those who
are blind, deaf, etc., in the sense-sphere plane and the beings in the fine-
material plane, who lack the senses of smell, taste and touch.
To the non-percipient beings: These beings are completely devoid
of consciousness and thus have no cognitive process. See V, §31.
§29 Summary
|4.54
In the sense-sphere plane, according to circumstances, eighty kinds of process consciousness are found, in the fine-material plane there are sixty-four, and in the immaterial plane, forty-two.
Herein, this is the analysis by way of planes.
|
Guide to §29
The eighty process cittas found in the sense-sphere plane include all
cittas except the nine sublime resultants, which never occur in a cogni-
tive process.
The sixty-four process cittas in the fine-material plane are as follows:
10 unwholesome (excluding the two with aversion) + 9 rootless resultants
`184
(excluding the pairs of nose -, tongue -, and body-consciousness) + 3
rootless functionals + 16 great wholesome and functionals + 10 fine-
material wholesome and functionals + 8 immaterial wholesome and
functionals + 8 supramundane.
The forty-two in the immaterial plane are as follows: 10 unwhole-
some + 1 mind-door adverting + 16 great wholesome and functionals +
8 immaterial wholesome and functionals + 7 supramundane (excluding
the path of stream-entry).
§30 Conclusion
|4.55
Thus the cognitive process connected with the six doors accord-
ing to circumstances continues on uninterrupted as long as life lasts,
intercepted by the life-continuum.
Thus ends the fourth chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of the Cognitive Process.
|
`185
CHAPTER V
COMPENDIUM OF THE PROCESS-FREED
(Vlthimuttasangahavibhaga)
§1 Introductory Verse
|5.1
Thus the compendium of the occurrence (of consciousness) has been explained by way of the cognitive process during the course of existence. Now the compendium of the occurrence (of consciousness) at rebirth will be told.
|
Guide to §1
In the preceding chapter the author explained the active aspect of the
flow of consciousness, its occurrence in cognitive processes during the
course of a lifetime. In the present chapter he will explain the occur-
rence of passive or “process-freed” consciousness. Although, in the open-
ing verse, the author specifies “at rebirth” {sandhiyam), this chapter will
four planes of existence;
four modes of rebirth-linking;
four kinds of kamma; and
fourfold advent of death.
deal with process-freed consciousness in the roles of bhavanga and death
as well.
§2 Enumeration of Categories
|5.2
In the compendium of process-freed consciousness, four sets of
four should be understood as follows:
i) four planes of existence;
ii) four planes of rebirth-linking;
ii) four kinds of kamma; and
iv) fourfold advent of death.
|
`186
TABLE 5.1: THE 31 REALMS OF EXISTENCE
Great Reward
20. Steady Aura
4th Jhana Plane	19. Infinite Aura
18. Minor Aura
17. Radiant Lustre
2nd & 3rd Jhana Planes 16. Infinite Lustre
15. Minor Lustre
Neither perception
nor non-perception
Nothingness
Infinite consciousness
Infinite space
1st Jhana Plane
14. Maha Brahma
13. Brahma's Ministers
`188
Guide to §2
The compendium of process-freed consciousness opens with a sur-
vey of the topography of the phenomenal world, charting the planes of
existence and the various realms within each plane (see Table 5.1). The
author undertakes this survey before examining the types of process-freed
consciousness because the external universe, according to the
Abhidhamma, is an outer reflection of the internal cosmos of mind, reg-
istering in concrete manifest form the subtle gradations in states of con-
sciousness. This does not mean that the Abhidhamma reduces the outer
world to a dimension of mind in the manner of philosophical idealism.
The outer world is quite real and possesses objective existence. How-
ever, the outer world is always a world apprehended by consciousness,
and the type of consciousness determines the nature of the world that
appears. Consciousness and the world are mutually dependent and inex-
tricably connected to such an extent that the hierarchical structure of the
realms of existence exactly reproduces and corresponds to the hierar-
chical structure of consciousness.
Because of this correspondence, each of the two—the objective
hierarchy of existence and the inner gradation of consciousness—pro-
vides the key to understanding the other. The reason why a living being
is reborn into a particular realm is because he has generated, in a previ-
ous life, the kamma or volitional force of consciousness that leads to
rebirth into that realm, and thus in the final analysis all the realms of
existence are formed, fashioned, and sustained by the mental activity of
living beings. At the same time these realms provide the stage for con-
sciousness to continue its evolution in a new personality and under a
fresh set of circumstances.
Each realm is keyed to a particular type of rebirth consciousness,
which becomes the bhavanga or life-continuum flowing on through the
course of existence until the termination of the life-process at death. Thus
in dependence on kamma ripening in the sense-sphere plane, a sense-
sphere rebirth consciousness is generated and sense-sphere existence
becomes manifest. In dependence on kamma ripening in the fine-material
plane, a fine-material rebirth consciousness is generated and fine-material
existence becomes manifest. And in dependence on kamma ripening in
the immaterial plane, an immaterial rebirth consciousness is generated
and immaterial existence becomes manifest. As the Buddha says:
“Kamma is the field, consciousness is the seed, and craving is the
moisture, for the consciousness of beings obstructed by ignorance and
fettered by craving to be established in a new realm of existence—either
low, middling, or superior”（A.3:76/i, 223). As determined by past
kamma, the seed of consciousness falls into an appropriate realm, sends
`189
down roots, and nurtured by its store of kammic accumulations, unfolds
according to its hidden potentials.

The Four Planes of Existence
|5.3
Of these, the four planes are:
(i) the woeful plane;
(ii) the sensuous blissful plane;
(iii) the fine-material-sphere plane;
(iv) the immaterial-sphere plane.
|
Guide to §3
The four planes: Though a distinction is made here between the woeful
plane and the sensuous blissful plane, both planes are actually subdivi-
sions of the sense-sphere plane, as is pointed out at the end of §5.

|5.4
Among these, the woeful plane is fourfold, namely:
(i) hell;
(ii) the animal kingdom;
(iii) the sphere of petas; and
(iv) the host of asuras.
|
Guide to §4
The woeful plane: The word apaya means literally that which is de-
void (apa) of happiness (aya). This is the collective name for those realms
of existence in which pain and misery greatly exceed happiness. They
are the realms where evildoers are reborn as a consequence of their evil
deeds.
Hell (niraya) is the lowest plane of existence in the Buddhist cos-
mos, the place of the most intense suffering. It is said that the beings in
hell have to suffer the results of their evil deeds from the beginning of
`190
their lives until the end, without a moment’s respite. The commentators
state that there are eight great hells, of increasing intensity of torment.
They are named Sanjlva, Kalasutta, Sanghata, Roruva, Maha Roruva,
Tapana, Maha Tapana, and Avici. Of these, Avici is the lowest and most
terrible. Each great hell is surrounded on each of its four sides by five
minor hells, bringing the total to 168 hells.
The animal kingdom: Buddhism maintains that the animal realm is
a woeful plane into which beings may be reborn as a result of evil
kamma. According to the Buddha, human beings who have committed
evil may be reborn as animals, and animals may, as a result of some
accumulated good kamma, be reborn as human beings or even as gods
in a heavenly world. Although the animal realm does not involve as much
misery as the hells, it is included in the woeful planes because the suf-
fering there greatly exceeds the amount of happiness and because it does
not provide suitable conditions for the performance of meritorious deeds.
The sphere of petas: The word peta, often translated as “hungry
ghosts,” refers to a class of beings who are tormented by intense hun-
ger and thirst as well as other afflictions from which they cannot find
relief. The petas have no world of their own. They live in the same world
as human beings—in forests, bogs, cemeteries, etc.—though they remain
invisible to humans except when they display themselves or are perceived
by those with the divine eye.
The host of asuras: The word asura, often translated “titans, ” is used
to refer to various classes of beings. As a realm within the woeful plane
the commentators identify the asuras with a group of tormented spirits
similar to the petas. These asuras are to be distinguished from the asuras
that combat the gods of the Tavatimsa heaven, who are included among
the Tavatimsa gods.
§5 The Sensuous Blissful Plane (kamasugatibhOmi)
|5.5
The sensuous blissful plane is sevenfold, namely:
(i) the human realm;
(ii) the Realm of the Four Great Kings;
(iii) the Realm of the Thirty-three Gods;
(iv) the Realm of the Yama Gods;
(v) the Delightful Realm;
(vi) the Realm of the Gods who rejoice in (their own) Creations;
(vii) the Realm of the Gods who lord over the Creations of Others.
|5.6
These eleven realms constitute the sense-sphere plane.
|
`191
Guide to §5
The human realm: The word mcimissa, human, literally means those
who have sharp or developed minds. As the human mind is very sharp,
this makes man much more capable of weighty moral and immoral ac-
tion than any other class of living beings. The human being is capable
of development up to Buddhahood, and also of such serious crimes as
matricide and parricide. The human realm is a mixture of both pain and
pleasure, suffering and happiness, but because it offers the opportunity
for attaining the highest happiness, it is considered a blissful realm.
The Realm of the Four Great Kings: The next six realms are the
sense-sphere heavens, the abodes of the devas or gods.These planes in-
volve a longer life-span than the human world and a richer variety of
sensual pleasures which, however, are inevitably impermanent.
The Catummaharajika heaven, the Realm of the Four Great Kings,
has four divisions corresponding to the four directions. Each is ruled
over by its own guardian deity and inhabited by a different class of demi-
gods. To the east, the divine king Dhatarattha rules over the gandhabbas,
the celestial musicians; to the south, VirO|haka presides over the
kumbhandas, the gnomic caretakers of forests, mountains, and hidden
treasures; in the western region the divinity VirDpakkha rules over the
nagas, demigods in the form of dragons; and in the north reigns
Vessavana, ruler of the yakkhas or spirits.
The Realm of the Thirty-three Gods: This heaven, Tavatimsa, is
so named because according to legend, a group of thirty-three noble-
minded men who dedicated their lives to the welfare of others were re-
born here as the presiding deity and his thirty-two assistants. The chief
of this realm is Sakka, also known as Indra, who resides in the Vejayanta
Palace in the realm’s capital city, Sudassana.
The Realm of the Yama Gods, etc.: Each of these heavens is de-
picted in the celestial hierarchy as situated above its predecessor. The
heaven of the Yama gods is a realm of great happiness presided over by
their ruler, the divine king Suyama or Yama. Tusita, the Delightful
Realm, is the abode of a Bodhisatta in his last existence before attain-
ing Buddhahood. The gods in the Nimmanarati heaven have the power
to create objects of sensual enjoyment by thought, in accordance with
their desires. The gods of the Paranimmitavasavatti realm do not create
`192
sucn oDjects tnemseives, Dut rney control tne objects or enjoymenr cre-
ated for their use by their attendants.
§6 The Fine-material-Sphere Plane (rupavacarabhOmi)
|5.7
The fine-material-sphere plane is sixteenfold, namely:
I. The first jhana plane: (i) the Realm of Brahma's Retinue; (ii) the Realm of Brahma’s Ministers; and (iii) the Maha Brahma Realm.
|5.8
II. The second jhana plane: (iv) the Realm of Minor Lustre; (v) the Realm of Infinite Lustre; and (vi) the Realm of Radiant Lustre.
|5.9
III. The third jhana plane: (vii) the Realm of Minor Aura; (viii) the Realm of Infinite Aura; and (ix) the Realm of Steady Aura. 
|5.10
IV. The fourth jhana plane: (x) the Realm of Great Reward; (xi) the realm of non-percipient beings; and the Pure Abodes.
|5.11
The Pure Abodes are fivefold: (xii) the Durable Realm; (xiii) the Serene Realm; (xiv) the Beautiful Realm; (xv) the Clear-sighted Realm; and (xvi) the Highest Realm.
|
Guide to §6
The fine-material-sphere plane is sixteenfold: The fine-material-
sphere plane is the realm of rebirth for those who have developed, dur-
ing their life, one or another of the fine-material jhanas, and at the time
of death still possess that jhana in the sense that they still have poten-
tial access to it, not having lost it owing to negligence and obsession by
obstructive states. This plane is divided into four tiers in accordance with
the four jhanas of the Suttanta system. In the Suttas only four jhanas
are mentioned, as the transition from the first to the second jhana takes
place by the simultaneous abandoning of initial application (vitakka) and
sustained application (vicara). Thus the second-jhana plane of existence
corresponds to the second and third jhanas of the Abhidhamma system,
`193
the third-jhana plane to the fourth jhana, and the fourth-jhana plane to
the fifth jhana.
Each of the four jhana planes is divided into three realms, except that
in the fourth-jhana plane the last realm is subdivided into five abodes.
The principle according to which rebirth takes place into the jhana realms
is explained at §31 below.
The Pure Abodes (suddhavasa) are five realms of rebirth open only
to non-returners, noble disciples who have attained the third stage of
sanctity. Those who take rebirth in these abodes never return to the lower
realms but attain final deliverance there.

§7 The Immaterial-Sphere Plane (arOpavacarabhOm!)
|5.12
The immaterial-sphere plane is fourfold, namely:
(i)	the realm of infinite space;
(ii)	the realm of infinite consciousness;
(iii)	the realm of nothingness; and
(iv)	the realm of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
|
Guide to §7
These are the four planes of rebirth for those who, at the time of death,
possess an immaterial meditative attainment. Each immaterial attainment
leads to rebirth into the corresponding realm.
§8 By way of Individuals
|5.13
In the Pure Abodes no worldlings, stream-enterers, or once returners are found in any way.
|5.14
Noble ones are not found in the non-percipient realm and in the woeful planes. In other planes are found both noble ones and non-noble ones.
Herein, these are the four planes.
|
`194
The Four Types of Rebirth-Linking
{patisandhicatukka)

§9 Overview
|5.15
Rebirth-linking is fourfold, namely:
rebirth-linking in the woeful plane;
rebirth-linking in the sensuous blissful plane;
rebirth-linking in the fine-material sphere; and
rebirth-linking in the immaterial sphere.
|
§10 Rebirth-Linking in the Woeful Plane
|5.16
Therein, the unwholesome-resultant investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity becomes the rebirth-linking (consciousness) at the moment of descent into the woeful plane. Then it lapses into the life-continuum and finally it becomes the death (consciousness) and is cut off. This is the one single woeful rebirth-linking.
|
`195
§11 Rebirth-Linking in the Sensuous Blissful Plane
|5.17
The wholesome-resultant investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity occurs as the rebirth-linking, life-continuum and death (consciousness) of deformed human beings of the sensuous blissful plane, such as those bom blind, etc., as well as of (some) earth-bound (deities) and of (some) fallen asuras.
|5.18
The eight great resultants act as the rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death (consciousness) everywhere in the sensuous blissful plane.
|5.19
These nine comprise rebirth-linking in the sensuous blissful plane.
|5.20
The (foregoing) ten modes are reckoned as sense-sphere rebirth-linking.
|
Guide to §§10-11
For a detailed explanation of the types of consciousness that perform
the functions of rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death, see III, §9.
Such as those born blind, etc.: The “etc.” (adi) here is intended to
include those born deaf, mute, mentally retarded, mentally deranged, and
also those born as eunuchs, hermaphrodites, and sexually indeterminate.
The commentators explain that the expression “born blind” refers to one
whose rebirth-consciousness is produced by a kamma that, owing to
deficiency of merit, is incapable of generating eyes with the capacity
for vision. The expression does not apply to those who emerge from the
womb blind because of some accident or illness incurred during the stay
in the womb, for blindness under such circumstances may occur also to
those with a double- or triple-rooted rebirth consciousness. The same
Drinciole applies to those born deaf. etc. In all such cases the rebirth
consciousness is invariably rootless only when the defect is already in-
herent in the kamma that generates rebirth.
(Some) earth-bound (deities): Buddhist cosmology recognizes a class
of deities who do not dwell in the heavenly realms but in proximity to
the earth, in remote regions such as forests, mountains, and shrines. These
beings are called earth-gods {bhummadeva). While the more powerful
deities in this class may possess double- or triple-rooted types of rebirth
consciousness, they are often accompanied by retinues which may in-
clude deities of defective merit who manage to maintain their lives with
difficulty. It is these, according to Ledi Sayadaw, that are intended here
as the earth-bound deities reborn with a rootless rebirth consciousness.
And (some) fallen asuras: These beings are said to dwell in villages
or in the vicinity of villages living off the remains of food discarded by
the residents. They also haunt or oppress human beings when they fail
to obtain food.
The (foregoing) ten modes: The ten modes of sense-sphere rebirth-
linking are obtained by way of the ten types of consciousness that per-
form the function of rebirth-linking in the sense sphere.
`196
§12 Sensuous Plane Life-Spans
|5.21
There is no definite limit to the duration of life of beings in the four woeful planes, or amongst humans and fallen asuras.
|5.22
The life-span of Gods of the Realm of the Four Great Kings is five hundred celestial years, that is, according to human reckoning, 9,000,000 years.
The life-span of the Thirty-three Gods is four times this amount.
The life-span of Yama Gods is four times that of the Thirty-three.
Four times that amount is the life-span of the Delightful Gods. Four times mat amount is tne nte-span ot the uods who rejoice in their Creations. Four times that amount is the life-span of the Gods who lord over the Creations of Others.
|5.23
In the plane of Gods who lord over Others’ Creations, the life-span, according to human reckoning, is nine-hundred and twenty-one kotis of years plus sixty-hundred-thousand years (9,216,000,000).
|
Guide to §12
There is no definite limit: In the four planes of woe the life-span is
highly variable, depending on the potency of the evil kamma that pro-
duces rebirth there. Thus in the hells some undergo torment only for a
few days and then pass on to rebirth elsewhere, while others must en-
dure torment for millions of years. In the human realm, too, the life-
span can vary from minutes to over a hundred years. Further, according
to Buddhist cosmology, the average span of human life also varies over
time, ranging between a minimum of ten years and a maximum of many
thousands of years.
Celestial years: The Vibhanga (§1023) states that one celestial day
(CD) in the Catummaharajika heaven equals fifty human years (HY);
`197
thirty such days amount to one celestial month; twelve such months con-
stitute one celestial year (CY). In the Tavatimsa heaven one celestial
day equals one hundred human years; in the Yama heaven, two hun-
dred human years; and so on, doubling in each higher heaven.
On this basis, the life-spans in the six heavenly worlds would be
computed as in the following table:
TABLE 5.2: LIFE-SPANS IN THE SENSE-SPHERE HEAVENS
Realm	CD	CY	HY
1 Catummaharajika	50 HY	500	9 million
2 Tavatimsa	100 HY	1000	36 million
3 Yama	200 HY	2000	144 million
4 Tusita	400 HY	4000	576 million
5 Nimmanarati	800 HY	8000	2,304 million
6 Paranimmitavasavatti	1,600 HY	16,000	9,216 million
§13 Rebirth-Linking in the Fine-material Sphere
|5.24
The first jhana resultant occurs in the first jhana plane as the rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death (consciousness);
|5.25
similarly, the second jhana resultant and the third jhana resultant (occur thus) in the second jhana plane; 
|5.26
the fourth jhana resultant in the third jhana plane;
|5.27
the fifth jhana resultant in the fourth jhana plane.
|5.28
But for non-percipient beings material form itself occurs as rebirth-linking. Similarly thereafter, during the course of existence and at the moment of death, only material form exists and perishes.
These are the six modes of rebirth-linking in the fine-material sphere.
§14 Life-Spans in the Fine-material Sphere
|5.29
Among these, the life-span of the Gods of Brahma’s Retinue is one-third of an aeon; 
|5.30
of Brahma’s Ministers, half an aeon; 
|5.31
of Maha Brahmas, one aeon; 
|5.32
of the Gods of Minor Lustre, two aeons; 
|5.33
of Infinite Lustre, four aeons; 
|5.34
of Radiant Lustre, eight aeons; 
|5.35
of Minor Aura, sixteen aeons; 
|5.36
of Infinite Aura, thirty-two aeons; 
|5.37
of Steady Aura, sixty-four aeons; 
|5.38
of Great Reward and non-percipient beings, 500 aeons; 
|5.39
of Durable Gods, 1,000 aeons; 
|5.40
of Serene Gods, 2,000 aeons;
|5.41
of Beautiful Gods, 4,000 aeons; 
|5.42
of Clear-sighted Gods, 8,000 aeons;
|5.43
of the Highest Gods, 16,000 aeons.
|
`198
Guide to §14
An aeon (kappa): The Buddhist texts speak of three kinds of aeon—
an interim aeon, an incalculable aeon, and a great aeon. An interim aeon
{antarakappd) is the period of time required for the life-span of human
beings to rise from ten years to the maximum of many thousands of years,
and then fall back to ten years. Twenty such interim aeons equal one
incalculable aeon (asankheyyakappa), and four incalculable aeons con-
stitute one great aeon (mahakappa). The length of a great aeon is said
by the Buddha to be longer than the time it would take for a man to
wear away a mountain of solid granite one yojana (about 7 miles) high
and wide by stroking it once every hundred years with a silk cloth
(S.15:5/ii,181-82).
According to the commentators, the aeon referred to in the figures
on the life-spans in the first-jhana plane is the asankheyyakappa, while
the aeon referred to from the Gods of Minor Lustre up through the higher
planes is the malmkappa.1
`199
§15 Rebirth-Linking in the Immaterial Sphere
|5.44
The first immaterial resultant occurs as the rebirth-linking, life-continuum, and death (consciousness) in the first immaterial plane, and the others occur in the same functions in their respective planes.
These are the four modes of rebirth-linking in the immaterial sphere.
|
§16 Life-Spans in the Immaterial Sphere
|5.45
Among them, the life-span of gods who have attained to the realm of infinite space is 20,000 aeons; 
|5.46
of those who have attained to the realm of infinite consciousness, 40,000 aeons; 
|5.47
of those who have attained to the realm of nothingness, 60,000 aeons;
|5.48
of those who have attained to the realm of neither-perception-nor-non-perception, 84,000 aeons.
|
§17 Summary
|5.49
The rebirth-linking consciousness, life-continuum consciousness, and the death consciousness in one (particular) birth are similar and have an identical object.
Herein, these are the four types of rebirth-linking.
|
`200
Four Types of Kamma
{kammacatukkam)
§18 By way of Function
|5.50
I. With respect to function there are four kinds of kamma, namely:
(i) productive kamma;
(ii) supportive kamma;
(iii) obstructive kamma; and
(iv) destructive kamma.
|
Guide to §18
Four types of kamma: The Pali term kammacatukka, the name of
this section, means a fourfold division of kamma. This section will ac-
tually introduce four fourfold divisions, in all sixteen types of kamma
obtained by applying four different methods of analysis.
The word kamma means literally action or deed, but in the Buddha’s
teaching it refers exclusively to volitional action. From a technical stand-
point, kamma denotes wholesome or unwholesome volition {cetana),
volition being the factor responsible for action. Thus the Buddha de-
clares: “It is volition, monks, that I call kamma, for having willed, one
performs an action through body, speech or mind”（A.6:63/ iii,415). All
volitional action, except that of a Buddha or an Arahant, constitutes
kamma. The Buddhas and the Arahants do not accumulate kamma, since
they have eradicated ignorance and craving, the roots of kamma. Never-
theless, even the Buddhas and Arahants are bound to experience the rip-
ening of their past kamma as long as their psychophysical personality
persists, that is, until they pass away.
The law of kamma (kammaniyama) is self-subsistent in its operation,
ensuring that willed deeds produce their effects in accordance with their
ethical quality just as surely as seeds bear fruit in accordance with their
species. The direct products of kamma are the resultant (vipaka) states
of consciousness and mental factors that arise when kamma finds the
right conditions to fructify. Kamma also produces a distinct type of matter
in the organic bodies of living beings, called materiality originating from
kamma (kammasamutthanarupa—see VI, §10).
With respect to function: Kammas perform different functions
(kicca), of which four are mentioned here. Any kamma, under different
circumstances, can perform any or several of these functions.
`201
V. COMPENDIUM OF THE PROCESS-FREED
TABLE 5.3: FOURFOLD KAMMA AT A GLANCE
I. By way of function
1.	Productive kamma
2.	Supportive "
3.	Obstructive "
4.	Destructive ”
II. By order of ripening
1.	Weighty kamma
2.	Death-proximate "
3.	Habitual
4.	Reserve
III.	By time of ripening
1.	Immediately effective kamma
2.	Subsequently effective "
3.	Indefinitely effective
4.	Defunct
IV.	By place of ripening
1.	Unwholesome kamma
2.	Sense-sphere wholesome "
3.	Fine-material-sphere wholesome "
4.	Immaterial-sphere wholesome ”
Productive ijanaka) kamma is wholesome or unwholesome voli-
tion which produces resultant mental states and kamma-born materiality,
both at the moment of rebirth-linking and during the course of exist-
ence. At the moment of conception, productive kamma generates the
rebirth-linking consciousness and the kamma-born types of materiality
constituting the physical body of the new being. During the course of
existence it produces other resultant cittas and the continuities of kamma-
born materiality, such as the sense faculties, sexual determination, and
the heart-base. Only a kamma that has attained the status of a full course
of action (see §22 below) can perform the function of producing rebirth-
linking, but all wholesome and unwholesome kammas without excep-
tion can produce results during the course of existence.
Supportive {upatthambaka) kamma is kamma which does not gain
an opportunity to produce its own result, but which, when some other
kamma is exercising a productive function, supports it either by enabling
it to produce its pleasant or painful results over an extended time without
obstruction or by reinforcing the continuum of aggregates produced by
another kamma. For example, when through the productive function of
wholesome kamma one is reborn as a human being, supportive kamma
may contribute to the extension of one’s life-span and ensure that one
is healthy and well provided with the necessities of life. When an
unwholesome kamma has exercised its productive function by causing
`202
Productive ijanaka) kamma is wholesome or unwholesome voli-
tion which produces resultant mental states and kamma-born materiality,
both at the moment of rebirth-linking and during the course of exist-
ence. At the moment of conception, productive kamma generates the
rebirth-linking consciousness and the kamma-born types of materiality
constituting the physical body of the new being. During the course of
existence it produces other resultant cittas and the continuities of kamma-
born materiality, such as the sense faculties, sexual determination, and
the heart-base. Only a kamma that has attained the status of a full course
of action (see §22 below) can perform the function of producing rebirth-
linking, but all wholesome and unwholesome kammas without excep-
tion can produce results during the course of existence.
Supportive {upatthambaka) kamma is kamma which does not gain
an opportunity to produce its own result, but which, when some other
kamma is exercising a productive function, supports it either by enabling
it to produce its pleasant or painful results over an extended time without
obstruction or by reinforcing the continuum of aggregates produced by
another kamma. For example, when through the productive function of
wholesome kamma one is reborn as a human being, supportive kamma
may contribute to the extension of one’s life-span and ensure that one
is healthy and well provided with the necessities of life. When an
unwholesome kamma has exercised its productive function by causing
During the course of existence many instances may be found of the
operation of obstructive kamma. For example, in the human realm such
kamma will obstruct the continuum of aggregates produced by kamma,
facilitating the maturation of kamma that results in suffering and caus-
ing failures in regard to property and wealth or family and friends, etc.
In the lower realms obstructive kamma may counteract the rebirth-pro-
ducing kamma, contributing to occasions of ease and happiness.
Destructive (upaghataka) kamma is wholesome or unwholesome
kamma which supplants other weaker kamma, prevents it from ripen-
ing, and produces instead its own result. For example, somebody born
as a human being may, through his productive kamma, have been origi-
nally destined for a long life-span, but a destructive kamma may arise
and bring about a premature death. At the time of death, at first a sign
of a bad destination may appear by the power of an evil kamma, her-
alding a bad rebirth, but then a good kamma may emerge, expel the bad
kamma, and having caused the sign of a good destination to appear,
produce rebirth in a heavenly world. On the other hand, a bad kamma
may suddenly arise, cut off the productive potential of a good kamma,
and generate rebirth in a woeful realm. According to Ledi Sayadaw, de-
structive kamma can also be responsible for cutting off the efficacy of
`203
any of the sense faculties—the eye, ear, etc.—causing blindness or deaf-
ness, etc., and can also cause sexual mutation.
The Vibhavinl-Tika distinguishes between productive kamma and
destructive kamma on the ground that productive kamma produces its
result without cutting off the result of some other kamma while destruc-
tive kamma does so after first cutting off another kamma’s result. But
other teachers cited by the VibhavinI hold that destructive kamma does
not produce its own result at all; it completely cuts off the result of the
other kamma, giving still a third kamma the opportunity to ripen.
Ledi Sayadaw gives the example of intentional killing to illustrate
how one kamma may exercise all four functions. When one person takes
another’s life, as long as the volition of killing does not get the oppor-
tunity to ripen it exercises any function among the other three functions:
it may support the ripening of other unwholesome kamma, or obstruct
the ripening of wholesome kamma, or cut off entirely the efficacy of
wholesome kamma. When the act of killing gains the opportunity to
ripen, then each volition involved in the act has the power to produce
one rebirth in the woeful planes; thereafter such volition has no more
power to produce rebirth-linking. However, such kamma can continue
to exercise the other three functions, as well as the function of produc-
ing results during the course of existence, even for a hundred thousand
aeons or more into the future.
§19 By Order of Ripening
|5.51
II. With respect to the order in which the effect of kamma takes place, there are four kinds of kamma, namely:
(i)	weighty kamma;
(ii)	death-proximate kamma;
(iii)	habitual kamma; and
(iv)	reserve kamma.
|
Guide to §19
The order in which the effect of kamma takes place: This section
concerns the order of precedence among different kammas in taking on
the role of generating rebirth-linking in the next existence.
Weighty (garuka) kamma is kamma of such powerful moral weight
that it cannot be replaced by any other kamma as the determinant of
`204
rebirth. On the wholesome side, this kamma is the attainment of the
jhanas. On the unwholesome side, it is the five heinous crimes together
with a fixed wrong view that denies the basis for morality. The five
heinous crimes (anantariyakamma) are: parricide, matricide, the mur-
der of an Arahant, the wounding of a Buddha, and maliciously creating
a schism in the Sangha. If someone were to develop the jhanas and later
were to commit one of the heinous crimes, his good kamma would be
obliterated by the evil deed, and the latter would generate rebirth into a
state of misery. For example, the Buddha’s ambitious cousin Devadatta
lost his psychic powers and was reborn in hell for wounding the Bud-
dha and causing a schism in the Sangha. But if someone were first to
commit one of the heinous crimes, he could not later reach a sublime or
supramundane attainment, because the evil kamma would create an in-
surmountable obstruction. Thus King Ajatasattu, while listening to the
Buddha speak the Samannaphala Sutta, the Discourse on the Fruits of
Recluseship, had all the other conditions for reaching stream-entry; but
because he had killed his father, King Bimbisara, he could not attain
the path and fruit.
Death-proximate {asanna) kamma is a potent kamma remembered
or done shortly before death, that is, immediately prior to the last javana
process. If a person of bad character remembers a good deed he has done,
or performs a good deed just before dying, he may receive a fortunate
rebirth; and conversely, if a good person dwells on an evil deed done
earlier, or performs an evil deed just before dying, he may undergo an
unhappy rebirth. For this reason in Buddhist countries it is customary
to remind a dying person of his good deeds or to urge him to arouse
good thoughts during the last moments of his life.
When there is no weighty kamma, and a potent death-proximate
kamma is performed, this kamma will generally take on the role of gen-
erating rebirth. This does not mean that a person will escape the fruits
of the other good and bad deeds he has committed during the course of
life. When they meet with conditions, these kammas too will produce
their due results.
Habitual {acuina) kamma is a deed that one habitually performs,
either good or bad. In the absence of weighty kamma and a potent death-
proximate kamma, this type of kamma generally assumes the rebirth-
generative function.
Reserve (katatta) kamma is any other deed, not included in the three
aforementioned categories, which is potent enough to take on the role
of generating rebirth. This type of kamma becomes operative when there
is no kamma of the other three types to exercise this function.
`205
§20 By Time of Ripening
|5.52
III. With respect to the time of taking effect, there are four kinds
of kamma, namely:
(i)	immediately effective kamma;
(ii)	subsequently effective kamma;
(iii)	indefinitely effective kamma; and
(iv)	defunct kamma.
|
Guide to §20
Immediately effective {ditthadliammavedamya) kamma is kamma
which, if it is to ripen, must yield its results in the same existence in
which it is performed; otherwise, if it does not meet the opportunity to
ripen in the same existence, it becomes defunct. According to the
Abhidhamma, of the seven javanas in a javana process, the first javana
moment, being the weakest of all, generates immediately effective
kamma.
Subsequently effective {upapajjavedamya) kamma is kamma which,
if it is to ripen, must yield its results in the existence immediately fol-
lowing that in which it is performed; otherwise it becomes defunct. This
type of kamma is generated by the last javana moment in a javana proc-
ess, which is the second weakest in the series.
Indefinitely effective {aparapariyavedamya) kamma is kamma
which can ripen at any time from the second future existence onwards, 
whenever it gains an opportunity to produce results. This kamma, gen-
erated by the five intermediate javana moments of a cognitive process,
never becomes defunct so long as the round of rebirths continues. No
one, not even a Buddha or an Arahant, is exempt from experiencing the
results of indefinitely effective kamma.
Defunct (aliosi) kamma: This term does not designate a special class
of kamma, but applies to kamma that was due to ripen in either the
present existence or the next existence but did not meet conditions con-
ducive to its maturation. In the case of Arahants, all their accumulated
kamma from the past which was due to ripen in future lives becomes
defunct with their final passing away.
`206
§21 By Place of Ripening
|5.53
IV. With respect to the place in which the effect takes place, there are four kinds of kamma, namely:
(i) unwholesome kamma;
(ii) wholesome kamma pertaining to the fine-material sphere;
(iii) wholesome kamma pertaining to the immaterial sphere.
(iv) wholesome kamma pertaining to the sense sphere;
Unwholesome and Wholesome Kamma
|
§22 Unwholesome Kamma
|5.54
Of them, unwholesome kamma is threefold according to the doors of action, namely: bodily action, verbal action, and mental action.
|5.55
How? Killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct are bodily actions generally occurring through the door of the body, known as bodily intimation.
|5.56
False speech, slandering, harsh speech, and frivolous talk are verbal actions generally occurring through the door of speech, known as vocal intimation.
|5.57
Covetousness, ill will, and wrong view are mental actions generally occurring only in the mind without (bodily or vocal) intimation.
|
`207
Guide to §22
The above passage enumerates the ten unwholesome courses of ac-
tion (akusalakammapatha). As shown, three are bodily, four are verbal,
and three are purely mental. The first seven courses are identified with
the volition initiating an effort to accomplish the respective action. Such
volition is an unwholesome kamma regardless of whether or not it com-
pletes the action, but if it does reach completion of the action and
achieves its aim (e.g. the death of the intended victim, the appropria-
tion of another’s property, etc.) then it becomes a full course of action.
The characteristic of a full course of action is being a kamma with the
potency to take on the rebirth-generating role.2
Generally occurring through the door of the body (kayadvara):
In relation to action, the doors (dvara) are the media through which
kamma is performed. The door of the body is bodily intimation
{kayavifinatti), a type of mind-produced material phenomenon by which
a person expresses, through the medium of the body, a volition arisen
in the mind (see VI, §4). The expression “generally occurring” (bahulla-
vuttito) is used because such actions as killing and stealing can also be
done by speech, i.e. by command, yet even in such cases these actions
are still considered bodily kamma.
The door of speech (vacidvara), similarly, denotes vocal intimation
(vaclvifinatti), the mind-originated material phenomenon by means of
which volition is expressed verbally (see VI, §4). Though such actions
as false speech, etc., may also be done bodily, i.e. by writing or by hand
signals, because their main medium of execution is the door of speech,
they are still considered verbal kamma.
Covetousness, etc.: The last three courses of action generally occur
only in the mind without reaching intentional expression through body
or speech. Such action is said to occur through the mind door
{manodvara), which here is a collective designation for consciousness
in its entirety.
Covetousness {abhijjha) is the mental factor of greed, arisen as the
wish to acquire another person’s property. Even though greed arises for
another's property, it does not become a full course of action unless one
gives rise to the wish to take possession of that property.
Ill will {vyapada) is the mental factor of hatred, which becomes a
full course of action when it arises with the wish that another being meets
with harm and affliction.
Wrong view {micchaditthi) becomes a full course of action when it
assumes the form of one of the morally nihilistic views which deny the
validity of ethics and the retributive consequences of action. Three such
views are mentioned often in the Sutta Pitaka:
`208
(i)	nihilism (natthika-ditthi), which denies the survival of the per-
sonality in any form after death, thus negating the moral signifi-
cance of deeds;
(ii)	the inefficacy of action view (akiriya-ditthi), which claims that
deeds have no efficacy in producing results and thus invalidates
moral distinctions; and
(iii)	the acausality view (ahetukaditthi), which states that there is no
cause or condition for the defilement and purification of beings,
that beings are defiled and purified by chance, fate, or necessity.3
§23 By way of Roots and Consciousness
|5.58
Of them, killing, harsh speech, and ill will spring from the root of hatred;
|5.59
sexual misconduct, covetousness, and wrong view from the root of greed; 
|5.60
the remaining four arise from the two roots. 
|5.61
According to the classes of consciousness this unwholesome kamma is altogether twelvefold.
|
Guide to §23
Strictly speaking, ill will is a mode of the root hatred and covetous-
ness is a mode of the root greed; wrong view is a mode of the cetasika
wrong view. These three courses of action are thus identifiable with the
corresponding cetasikas. The other seven courses of action are identifi-
able with the cetasika of volition (cetana) arisen along with the unwhole-
some roots. Although instances may be found where, for example, greed
may be the underlying motivation for killing and hatred may be the
underlying motivation for sexual misconduct, the Abhidhamma holds
that the volition that drives the act of cutting off the life faculty of an-
other being is always rooted in hatred, i.e. aversion towards the contin-
ued existence of the being, while the volition that drives the act of sexual
transgression is always rooted in greed, i.e. desire to enjoy sexual pleasure
with the illicit partner. The volition driving the other four acts —steal-
ing, lying, slandering, and frivolous talk—may be accompanied by ei-
ther greed or hatred. All unwholesome courses of action are invariably
accompanied by the root delusion. Unwholesome kamma is also identi-
fiable with the twelve unwholesome cittas. In this case the citta itself as
`209
a composite whole rather than the individual factor of volition is con-
sidered to be the kamma.
§24 Wholesome Kamma of the Sense Sphere
|5.62
Wholesome kamma of the sense sphere is threefold according to the doors of action, namely, bodily action pertaining to the door of the body; verbal action pertaining to the door of speech; and mental
action pertaining to the door of the mind.
|5.63
Similarly, it is threefold as giving, virtue, and meditation. 
|5.64
But it is eightfold according to the classes of consciousness.
|5.65
It is also tenfold as: (i) giving; (ii) virtue; (iii) meditation; (iv) reverence; (v) service; (vi) transference of merit; (vii) rejoicing in (others’）merit; (viii) hearing the Dhamma; (ix) teaching the Dhamma; and (x) straightening out one’s views.
|5.66
All these twenty kinds (unwholesome and wholesome) are known as kamma pertaining to the sense sphere.
|
Guide to §24
According to the doors of action: By way of door of action, ten
courses of wholesome kamma are enumerated. The three of body are
abstinence from the three unwholesome bodily deeds; the four of speech
are abstinence from the four unwholesome verbal deeds; the three of
mind are non-covetousness, non-ill will, and right view. In terms of ul-
timate realities, the first seven are identified as two of the abstinences, 
i.e. the cetasikas of right action and right speech, and also as the volitions
`210
arisen along with those abstinences. The last three are modes of the three
wholesome roots, non-greed, non-hatred, and non-delusion.
Similarly, it is threefold, etc.: The threefold and tenfold lists given
here are commonly known as the three and ten bases of meritorious deeds
(jtimnakiriyavatthu). The eight classes of consciousness by which such
wholesome kamma is created are the eight great wholesome cittas.
All these twenty kinds: Kamma arising from the twelve unwhole-
some cittas and the eight great wholesome cittas.
§25 Wholesome Kamma of the Fine-material Sphere
|5.67
Wholesome kamma of the fine-material sphere is purely mental action. It consists in meditation that has reached absorption and is fivefold by distinction of the jhana factors.
|
§26 Wholesome Kamma of the Immaterial Sphere
|5.68
So too, wholesome kamma of the immaterial sphere is purely mental action. It consists in meditation that has reached absorption and is fourfold by distinction of the object.
|
Guide to §§25-26
Fivefold by distinction of the jhana factors: the five fine-material-sphere jhanas.
Fourfold by distinction of the object: the four immaterial sphere attainments.
Results of Kamma
§27 Results of Unwholesome Kamma
|5.69
Herein, unwholesome kamma excluding restlessness produces rebirth-linking in the woeful plane. But during the course of existence
all twelve (unwholesome classes of consciousness) give effect to the seven unwholesome resultants anywhere in the sensuous world or the fine-material world, according to circumstances.
|
`211
Guide to §27
Unwholesome kamma excluding restlessness: The citta rooted in
delusion and accompanied by restlessness is the weakest of all the
unwholesome cittas, and for this reason it cannot take on the role of
generating rebirth. Any of the other eleven unwholesome cittas can
generate the unwholesome-resultant investigating consciousness which
functions as rebirth-linking, bhavanga, and death consciousness for the
beings reborn in the four woeful realms. All twelve unwholesome cittas
can generate the seven unwholesome-resultant cittas anywhere in the
sensuous world during the course of existence—the five kinds of sense
consciousness, and the receiving and investigating consciousnesses. In
the fine-material world they produce only four unwholesome-resultants,
the threefold sense consciousness of nose, tongue, and body being
excluded. See Table 5.A—p.212.
§28 Results of Sense-Sphere Wholesome Kamma
|5.70
Wholesome kamma of the sense sphere produces rebirth-linking in the sensuous blissful plane, and so too, (it produces) the great resultants in the course of existence. But it gives effect to the eight
rootless resultants anywhere in the sensuous world or the fine-material world, according to circumstances.
|
Guide to §28
In §§29-30 the author will explain the correlations between each type
of wholesome citta and the resultants it is capable of producing.
The great resultants occur in four modes: with the three process-freed
functions of rebirth-linking, bhavanga, and death, and within the cogni-
tive process, with the function of registration. These resultants ripen only
in the sensuous world.
The eight rootless resultants are the fivefold sense consciousness,
receiving consciousness, and the twofold investigating consciousness.
`214
V. VITHIMUTTASANGAHA
The latter can occur within the cognitive process in the role of registration
as well, while the one accompanied by equanimity can also function as
the rebirth, bhavanga, and death consciousness for those of defective
birth. All eight rootless resultants ripen in the sensuous world, but three
types of sense consciousness—of nose, tongue, and body—do not ripen
in the fine-material world, as the beings there lack the requisite sense
faculties.
§29 Wholesome Results and the Roots
|5.71
Therein, superior wholesome kamma accompanied by three roots produces rebirth-linking similarly accompanied by three roots, and during the course of existence it gives effect to sixteen kinds of
resultants.
|5.72
Wholesome kamma of an inferior grade accompanied by three roots, and that of a superior grade accompanied by two roots, produces rebirth-linking with two roots, and gives effect to twelve kinds
of resultants, excluding those with three roots, during the course of existence.
|5.73
But wholesome kamma of an inferior grade accompanied by two roots produces rebirth-linking without roots, and gives effect to rootless resultants during the course of existence.
|
Guide to §29
Superior wholesome kamma: Wholesome kamma is distinguished
by way of its capacity to produce results into two grades, the superior
and the inferior. The superior grade (ukkattha) of wholesome kamma is
that done with a mind that has been well cleansed of the defilements
and is attended with good causes before and after the commission of
the deed; for example, giving alms to the virtuous with wealth right-
eously obtained, while rejoicing before and after the act of giving. The
`215
inferior grade (omaka) is that done with a mind that before and after
the performance of the wholesome deed is tainted by such defiled states
as self-exaltation, the disparagement of others, and subsequent regret.
Rebirth linking ... accompanied by three roots, etc.: This occurs
by way of the four great resultants accompanied by knowledge. The six-
teen resultants that arise in the course of existence are the eight that are
rootless and the eight great resultants.
Twelve kinds of resultants: excluding the four great resultants
accompanied by knowledge.
Rebirth-linking without roots: the wholesome-resultant investigating consciousness accompanied by equanimity.
§30 An Alternative View
|5.74
Some (teachers) say that unprompted (states of consciousness) do not produce prompted resultants and prompted (states of consciousness) do not produce unprompted resultants.
According to them, as stated above, the arising of the resultants should be set forth in due order as twelve, ten, and eight.
|
Guide to §30
Some teachers say: The view on resultants stated in §29 was ad-
vanced by the ancient master Tipitaka Culanaga Thera and is the prevalent opinion among teachers of the Abhidhamma. In §30 the author states an alternative view held by the teachers of the school of Maha Dhamrnarakkhita Thera, an Abhidhamma master at the ancient Moravapi
Monastery in Sri Lanka.4
Twelve, ten, and eight: On this view, both at rebirth and during the
course of existence, unprompted wholesome cittas produce only
unprompted resultants and prompted wholesome cittas produce only
prompted resultants. This means that during life, the superior three-rooted
wholesome cittas produce only twelve resultants each, the eight rootless
resultants and either the four unprompted or the four prompted resultants,
corresponding to their own nature as unprompted or prompted. The
wholesome cittas of the second grade produce ten resultants each, the
eight rootless resultants and either the two unprompted or the two
prompted two-rooted resultants, again corresponding to their own nature
`216
SS Wholesome Citta	Rebirth Resultant	Resultants during Life		
		Rootless Resultants	With Roots: Gen. View	With Roots: Alt. View
1st supr.	3 roots	All 8	1-8	1, 3, 5, 7
1st infr.	2 roots	vv	3, 4, 7, 8	3,7
2nd supr.	3 roots	»•	1-8	2, 4, 6, 8
2nd infr.	2 roots	tf	3, 4, 7, 8	4,8
3rd supr.	2 roots	ft	3, 4, 7, 8	3,7
3rd infr.	Rootless	n	None	None
4th supr.	2 roots	tf	3, 4’ 7, 8	4,8
4th infr.	Rootless	•i	None	None
5 th supr.	3 roots	rf	1-8	1,3, 5,7
5th infr.	2 roots	IV	3, 4, 7, 8, 	3,7
6th supr.	3 roots	tt	1-8	2, 4, 6, 8
6th infr.	2 roots	IV	3’ 4’ 7, 8	4,8
7 th supr.	2 roots	vt	3, 4, 7, 8	3,7
7th infr.	Rootless	"	None	None
8 th supr.	2 roots	V9	3, 4, 7, 8	4,8
8th infr.	Rootless	•1	None	None
NOTE: For the numbers of the sense-sphere wholesome and resultant cittas, see
Table 1.4.
as unprompted or prompted. As in the prevalent view, so in this view
too the weakest grade of wholesome cittas produce only rootless rebirth-
linking and only the eight rootless resultants during the course of exist-
ence. For a tabular comparison of the two views, see Table 5.5.
§31 Results of Fine-material-Sphere Wholesome Kamma
`217
|5.75
As regards wholesome kamma of the fine-material sphere, those who develop the first jhana to a limited degree are reborn into Brahma’s Retinue.
|5.76
Developing the same to a medium degree, they are reborn among Brahma’s Ministers.
|5.77
Developing it to a superior degree, they are reborn among the Maha Brahmas.
|5.78
Similarly, developing the second jhana and the third jhana to a limited degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Minor Lustre.
|5.79
Developing them to a medium degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Infinite Lustre.
|5.80
Developing them to a superior degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Radiant Lustre.
|5.81
Developing the fourth jhana to a limited degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Minor Aura.
|5.82
Developing it to a medium degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Infinite Aura. 
|5.83
Developing it to a superior degree, they are reborn among the Gods of Steady Aura.
|5.84
Developing the fifth jhana, they are reborn among the Gods of Great Reward.
|5.85
Developing dispassion towards perception, they are reborn among the non-percipient beings.
|5.86
But non-returners are reborn in the Pure Abodes.
|
Guide to §31
Wholesome kamma of the fine-material sphere: Each of the five
fine-material-sphere jhanas produces, as its kammic result, the resultant
fine-material-sphere citta that is its own exact counterpart. This citta is
the only resultant produced by the wholesome jhana citta itself. The
wholesome cittas generated in the preparatory stages of meditation cul-
minating in jhana are sense-sphere wholesome cittas, and their results
accordingly are sense-sphere resultants, not fine-material resultants. The
fine-material-sphere resultant citta performs only the three functions of
rebirth-linking, bhavanga, and death. This means that it occurs only as
a process-freed consciousness. It does not occur within the cognitive
process, nor does the wholesome jhana citta produce any resultants oc-
curring in the cognitive process. All resultant cittas occurring in the
cognitive process, with the exception of the supramundane fruits, are
sense-sphere resultants.
Each wholesome jhana citta generates rebirth in the fine-material
realm that corresponds with its own level. However, the fine-material
`218
realms are structured in accordance with the tour jhanas ot the Suttanta
system into four broad tiers rather than five, and thus the second and
third jhana cittas of the Abhidhamma fivefold analysis of jhana both
produce rebirth into the fine-material realms corresponding to the sec-
ond jhana of the Suttanta system.
The lower three tiers of the fine-material world each consist of three
distinct realms. These realms are the spheres of rebirth for those who
develop the corresponding jhana to three degrees of mastery: limited,
medium, and superior. The jhana citta itself is not distinguished into
different types according to the three degrees of development. The citta
is defined as a jhana citta of a particular type in terms of its constellation
of cetasikas, and for any given jhana these remain the same no matter
whether the jhana is developed to an inferior, middling, or superior degree
of mastery. However, the degree of development affects the potency of
the citta to generate rebirth, and thus in each tier three different realms
are found as the objective counterparts of their different potencies. In
the case of a meditator who has developed several jhanas, the highest
one he still possesses at the end of his life is the one that will take on
the role of generating rebirth. See Table 5.4—p.213.
Developing the fifth jhana: The principle according to which this
plane is divided differs from that which divides the previous three. In
this plane, all worldlings, stream-enterers, and once-returners who de-
velop the fifth jhana in the normal way—whether to a limited, medium
or superior degree —are reborn in the Realm of Great Reward. Some
worldlings, however, adopt the attitude that consciousness and percep-
tion are the root of all misery, and they develop the fifth jhana conjoined
with a strong sense of dispassion towards perception. Because their fifth
jhana citta is permeated by the wish for perception to cease, they are
reborn in the realm of non-percipient beings. There they exist as mere
animate material bodies—the vital nonad (see VI, §28)—until they pass
away and take rebirth elsewhere.
But non-returners are reborn in the Pure Abodes: It is said that
their rebirth into these five realms is determined by their predominant
spiritual faculty. Non-returners in whom faith is the dominant faculty
are reborn into the Aviha realm; those in whom energy is dominant, into
the Atappa realm; those in whom mindfulness is dominant, into the
Sudassa realm; those in whom concentration is dominant, into the Sudassl
realm; and those in whom wisdom is dominant, into the Akanittha realm.
Although none but non-returners are reborn into the Pure Abodes, there
is no fixed law holding that all non-returners are reborn there. It may
be that the Pure Abodes are open only to non-returners who possess
the fifth jhana, while non-returners with a lower jhana attainment will
`219
be reborn elsewhere in the tine-material plane. However, all non-returners
must be reborn in the fine-material plane because they have eradicated
sensual desire (kamaraga), the fetter which leads to rebirth in the sen-
suous plane.
§32 Results of Immaterial-Sphere Wholesome Kamma
|5.87
Developing wholesome kamma of the immaterial sphere, they are reborn in the immaterial planes corresponding (to their attainments).
|
Guide to §32
That is, one who has developed the base of infinite space, and at the
time of death has not lost it due to negligence and other hindrances, will
be reborn into the realm of infinite space. Similarly with respect to the
other immaterial attainments: the highest attainment preserved at the time
of death will generate rebirth into the corresponding realm.
As in the case of the fine-material-sphere cittas, each immaterial-
sphere wholesome citta produces as its result only its corresponding
resultant citta, which fulfils only the three functions of rebirth, bhavanga,
and death in the immaterial realm to which it pertains.
§33 Conclusion
|5.88
Thus sublime merit, determined according to planes, produces similar results (both) at rebirth-linking and in the course of existence.
Herein, this is the fourfold kamma.
|
`220
The Process of Death and Rebirth
(cutipatisandhikkama)
§34 Four Causes of Death
|5.89
The advent of death is fourfold, namely: (i) through the expiration of the life-span; (ii) through the expiration of the (productive) kammic force; (iii) through the (simultaneous) expiration of both; and (iv) through (the intervention of) a destructive kamma.
|
Guide to §34
The advent of death: Death is formally defined as the cutting off of the life faculty (jivitindriya) included within the limits of a single existence.
Through the expiration of the life-span: This is the kind of death
that comes about for the beings in those realms of existence where the
life-span is bounded by a definite limit (see §§12, 14, 16). In the hu-
man realm too this should be understood as death in advanced old age
due to natural causes. If the productive kamma is still not exhausted when
death takes place through reaching the maximum age, the kammic force
can generate another rebirth on the same plane or on some higher plane,
as in the case of the devas.
Through the expiration of the (productive) kammic force: This
is the kind of death that takes place when the kamma generating rebirth
expends its force even though the normal life-span is not exhausted and
there are otherwise favourable conditions for the prolongation of life.
When both the life-span and kammic force simultaneously come to an
end, this is death by the expiration of both.
Through (the intervention of) a destructive kamma: This is a term
for the death that occurs when a powerful destructive kamma cuts off
the force of the rebirth-generating kamma even before the expiration of
the life-span (see §18).
The first three types of death are known as timely death (kalamarana),
the last as untimely death (akcilamarana). An oil lamp, for example, may
be extinguished due to the exhaustion of the wick, the exhaustion of the
oil, the simultaneous exhaustion of both, or some extraneous cause, like
a gust of wind.
§35 The Signs at the Time of Death
`221
|5.90
Now in the case of those who are about to die, at the time of death one of the following presents itself, according to circumstances, through any of the six (sense) doors by the power of kamma: (i) a kamma that is to produce rebirth-linking in the next existence; or (ii) a sign of kamma, that is, a form, etc., that had been apprehended previously at the time of performing the kamma or something that was instrumental in performing the kamma; or (iii) a sign of destiny, that is, (a symbol of the state) to be obtained and experienced in the immediately following existence.

§36 The Mind at the Time of Death Thereafter, attending to that object thus presented, the stream of consciousness —in accordance with the kamma that is to be matured, whether pure or corrupted, and in conformity with the state into which one is to be reborn—continually flows, inclining mostly towards that state. Or that rebirth-productive kamma presents itself to a sense door in the way of renewing.
|
`222
Guide to §35
For an explanation of the three types of object presented to the mind
of the dying individual, see III, §17. It should be stressed that this
object presents itself to the javana process of the dying person, not to
the death consciousness itself. The death consciousness (cuticitta), the
final citta in a life term, apprehends the same object grasped by the
rebirth consciousness and bhavanga of the existence that is about to
end. The object of the last javana process then serves as the object of
the rebirth consciousness and bhavanga in the next existence, and be-
comes in turn the object of the death consciousness at the end of that
existence.

Guide to §36
In the way of renewing (abhinavakaranavasena): that is, the kamma
presenting itself does not appear as a memory image of something that
was previously done, but it appears to the mind door as if it were being
done at that very moment.
§37 Death and Rebirth-Linking
|5.91
To one who is on the verge of death, either at the end of a cognitive process or at the dissolution of the life-continuum, the death consciousness, the consummation of the present life, arises and ceases in the way of death.
Immediately alter that (death consciousness) has ceased, a rebirth-linking consciousness arises and is established in the subsequent existence, apprehending the object thus obtained, either supported by the heart-base or baseless, as is appropriate; it is generated by a volitional formation that is enveloped by latent ignorance and rooted in latent craving. That rebirth-linking consciousness, so called because it links together the two consecutive existences, is conjoined with its mental adjuncts, and acts as the forerunner to the conascent states as their locus (or foundation).
|
Guide to §37
To one who is on the verge of death: The last cognitive process
begins when the bhavanga is interrupted, vibrates for one moment, and
is then arrested. Thereafter follows either a sense-door process taking
as object some sense object presenting itself at one of the five sense doors
or a bare mind-door process taking as object either some sense object
or a mental object presenting itself at the mind door. Within this termi-
nal process the javana phase, by reason of its weakness, runs for only five
mind-moments rather than the usual seven. This process lacks original
`223
productive kammic potency, but acts rather as the channel for the past
kamma that has assumed the rebirth-generative function. Following the
javana stage two registration cittas {tadarammana) may or may not fol-
low. In some cases the bhavanga may follow the last process cittas. Then,
as the very last citta, the death consciousness arises performing the func-
tion of passing away from the present life. With the ceasing of the death
consciousness, the life faculty is cut off. Then the body remains a mass
of inanimate material phenomena born of temperature, and continues as
such until the corpse is reduced to dust.
Immediately after that has ceased: Following the dissolution mo-
ment of the death consciousness, there arises in a new existence the re-
birth-linking consciousness apprehending the object thus obtained in the
final javana process of the previous life. This citta is supported by the
heart-base in realms which include matter, but is baseless in the imma-
terial realms. It is generated by a volitional formation, i.e. the kamma
of the previous javana process, which in turn is grounded in the twin
roots of the round of existence, latent ignorance and latent craving. The
rebirth consciousness is conjoined with its mental adjuncts, i.e. the
cetasikas, which it serves as a forerunner not in the sense that it pre-
cedes them, but in that it acts as their locus (or foundation).

§38 Objects of Sense-Sphere Rebirth Consciousness
|5.92
Herein, in the death-proximate cognitive process, only five feebly occurring javanas should be expected. Therefore, when death takes place while present objects are occurring and have entered the avenue of sense, then the rebirth-linking and life-continuum (of the new existence) also take a present object. In the case of a sense-sphere rebirth-linking, when the object is a sign of kamma or a sign of destiny perceived at any of the six doors, that object may be present or it may be past. But kamma (as object) is only past, and it is perceived only at the mind door. All these objects (of sense-sphere rebirth) are limited phenomena only.
|
`224
Guide to §38
The rebirth-linking and life-continuum ... also take a present ob-
ject: A present object apprehended at the time of death may persist
through the occasion of rebirth-linking and the first few bhavangas, and
thus these too may take a present object.
In the case of a sense-sphere rebirth-linking, etc.: If the object of
the rebirth consciousness is a kamma, then it is necessarily past and must
be a mental object apprehended at the mind door. If the object is a sign
of kamma, then it can be apprehended at any of the six doors and may
be either past or present. In the case of the sign of destiny as object,
different teachers advance conflicting interpretations. Some commenta-
tors, including the author of the Vibhavinl-Tika, hold that the sign of
destiny is necessarily a present visible form apprehended at the mind
door. They interpret Acariya Anuruddha’s statement in the text as mean-
ing: “When the object is a sign of kamma it may be perceived at any of
the six doors and may be present or past; when it is a sign of destiny it
is perceived at the sixth door, i.e. the mind door, and is present•” Other
commentators, including Ledi Sayadaw, reject this interpretation as
forced and too narrow. They argue that Acariya Anuruddha must be taken
at his word as holding the wider view that the sign of destiny can be
past or present and may appear at any of the six doors. Ledi Sayadaw
asserts that when the Abhidhamma texts commonly speak of the sign
of destiny as a present visible object appearing at the mind door, this is
said by way of its usual manifestation but does not mean that it does
not become manifest in other ways, for example, as the groans of those
in hell or as celestial music or fragrance, etc.

§39 Objects of Sublime Rebirth Consciousness
|5.93
In the case of rebirth-linking in the fine-material sphere, the object is a concept and is always a sign of kamma. 
|5.94
So too, in the case of rebirth-linking in the immaterial sphere, the object —which may be a sublime state or a concept, whichever is appropriate—is always a sign of kamma.
|
`225
KEY: K = kamma; SK = sign of kamma; SD = sign of destiny; Rb = rebirth consciousness; Dh = death consciousness;
rest as in Tables 4.2 and 4.3.
NOTE: The above diagram shows the rebirth process with a present visible form occurring as sign of kamma. With other objects the process would occur differently. Note that the visible form, with a duration of 17 mind-moments, is a present object for the 14 cittas of the last javana process of the old life and the first 3 cittas of the new life; from the third bhavanga on it becomes a past object.
`226
V. VITHIMUTTASANGAHA
|5.95
In the case of non-percipient beings, only the vital nonad becomes established in the way of rebirth-linking. Hence they are called materially reborn. 
|5.96
Those in the immaterial planes are called mentally reborn.
|5.97
The rest are called materially and mentally reborn.
|
Guide to §39
The object of the fine-material-sphere rebirth consciousness is the
counterpart sign that served as the object of the jhana generating rebirth.
This is considered a concept and a sign of kamma. The objects of the
first and third immaterial absorptions—the concepts of infinite space and
of nothingness —become the objects of rebirth consciousness in the cor-
responding realms. The objects of the second and fourth immaterial
absorptions are the cittas of the first and third immaterial absorptions,
and these are sublime states. In all these cases the object is a sign of
kamma. The non-percipient beings are without consciousness, and hence
do not take any objects at rebirth-linking. The “vital nonad” is the group
of material phenomena containing the life faculty, i.e. organic matter.
See VI, §17.
§40 Determination of Rebirth
|5.98
When one passes away from an immaterial realm, one may be reborn in superior immaterial realms but not in lower immaterial realms, and one may also be reborn in the sensuous plane with a three-rooted rebirth-consciousness.
When one passes away from the fine-material sphere, one is not reborn without roots. After passing away from a three-rooted existence in the sensuous plane, one may be reborn anywhere. The rest (i.e. those who pass away with two roots and no roots) are reborn only in the sense-sphere realms.
Herein, this is the procedure with regard to death and rebirth.
|
`227
Guide to §40
The determination of rebirth differs significantly for worldlings and
noble disciples who have not yet reached Arahantship. The text above
describes the procedure only in the case of worldlings. Here we will first
explain the procedure for worldlings, then the procedure for noble dis-
ciples still in training.
Beings in the immaterial realms may develop the immaterial jhana
that corresponds to their level of rebirth or the higher jhanas, but not
those that are lower. Thus when they pass away, they may be reborn on
the same plane or on a higher plane, but not on a lower jhana plane. If,
however, they fall away from their jhana attainment, they are reborn in
the sensuous plane by the power of their access concentration (upa-
carasamadlii, see IX, §4) and thus take rebirth with one of the three-
rooted sense-sphere resultants.
Those who pass away from the non-percipient realm are reborn in
the sensuous plane with a sense-sphere resultant citta having either two
or three roots. Passing away from elsewhere in the fine-material plane,
one may be reborn either in an immaterial realm if one has possession
of an immaterial jhana, or in a fine-material realm if one has posses-
sion of a fine-material jhana, or in the sensuous plane if one has gener-
ated strong kamma tending towards that plane. One who takes rebirth
in the sensuous plane after passing away from the fine-material plane
must do so with either a two-rooted or three-rooted rebirth conscious-
ness.
Those who pass away with three roots in the sensuous plane may take
rebirth in any plane, since a sense-sphere being with three roots can
perform any type of kamma. Those who pass away within the sensuous
plane with two roots or no roots are reborn only in the sensuous plane;
they may take rebirth with either of the two rootless investigating cittas
or with any of the sense-sphere resultant cittas possessing two or three
roots.
In the case of noble disciples there can be no regression from a su-
perior type of death consciousness to an inferior type of rebirth conscious-
ness. All noble disciples pass away with a three-rooted death
consciousness, since without three roots it is impossible to have attained
the path and fruit. Noble disciples still in training (non-Arahants) re-
arise either in the same plane or in a superior plane; they acquire either
the same type of rebirth consciousness or a superior one. Of course, those
who have reached the path and fruit of Arahantship do not take rebirth
in any plane after death.
See Table 5.7 at the end of this chapter.
`228
§41 The Continuity of Consciousness
|5.99
So, for those who have thus taken rebirth, from the moment immediately following the cessation of the rebirth-linking (consciousness), that same type of consciousness apprehending that same object flows on uninterruptedly like the stream of a river, and it does so until the arising of the death consciousness, so long as there is no occurrence of a cognitive process. 
Being an essential factor of existence (or life), this consciousness is called the life-continuum. 
|5.100
At the end of life, having become the death consciousness on the occasion of passing away, it then ceases. 
|5.101
Thereafter, the rebirth-linking consciousness and the others continue to occur, revolving in due sequence like the wheel of a cart.
|
Guide to §41
Immediately following ... the rebirth-linking: The rebirth-linking
consciousness is followed by sixteen moments of the bhavanga citta.
Thereafter a mind-door adverting consciousness arises, followed by a
process of seven javanas in which an attachment develops to the new
existence (bhavanikanti-javana). This cognitive process, the first in the
new life, takes as object the rebirth-linking consciousness; the javanas
consist in sense-sphere cittas rooted in greed, dissociated from wrong
views, unprompted. When this process ends, the bhavanga again arises
and perishes, and continues thus whenever there is no intervention of a
cognitive process. In this way the stream of consciousness flows on from
conception until death, and from death to new birth “revolving like the
wheel of a cart.”
`229
§42 Conclusion
|5.102
Just as here, so again in the next existence, there arise rebirth-linking consciousness, life-continuum, cognitive processes, and death consciousness. Again, with rebirth and life-continuum, this stream of consciousness turns round.
The wise, disciplining themselves long, understand the impermanence (of life), realize the deathless state, and completely cutting off the fetters of attachment, attain peace.
Thus ends the fifth chapter in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled the Compendium of the Process-freed.
|
`230
TABLE 5.7: DETERMINATION OF REBIRTH
A. Worldlings
	Old Realm	Death Con- sciousness	New Realm	Rebirth Con- sciousness
31	Neither perception nor non-perception	4th IS rst.	5-11, 31	4th IS rst.; 3-rtd. SS rst. 4
30	Nothingness	3rd IS rst.	5-11, 30, 31	3rd-4th IS rst.; 3-rtd. SS rst 4
29	Infinite consness.	2nd IS rst.	5-11, 29-31	2nd-4th IS rst.; 3-rtd. SS rst. 4
28	Infinite space	1st IS rst.	5-11, 28-31	lst-4th IS rst.; 3-rtd. SS rst. 4
22	Non-percipient	None	5-11	Gt. SS rst. 8
21	Great Reward	5th FMS rst.	5-31	Gt. SS rst. 8; FMS rst. 5; IS rst. 4
20 19	Steady Aura Infinite Aura	4th FMS rst. H	«v it	ft ff
18	Minor Aura	ft		•t
17 16	Radiant Lustre Infinite Lustre	2nd-3rd FMS rst. »»	«i	ti ff
15	Minor Lustre	»»	«i	tf
`231
TABLE 5. 7: — Continued
B. Trainees
	Old Realm	Death Con- sciousness	New Realm	Rebirth Con- sciousness
31	Neither perception nor non-perception	4th IS rst.	31	4th IS rst.
30	Nothingness	3rd IS rst.	30, 31	3rd-4th IS rst.
29	Infinite consness.	2nd IS rst.	29-31	2nd-4th IS rst.
28	Infinite space	1st IS rst.	28-31	1 st-4th IS rst.
27	Highest Pure Abode	5 th FMS rst.	None	None
26	Clear-sighted •’ •’	ft	27	5th FMS rst.
25	Beautiful ""	«v	26’ 27	"
24	Serene "	ff	25-27	"
23	Durable ■’ "	"	24-27	"
21	Great Reward	«v	21, 23-31	
20	Steady Aura	4th FMS rst.	20’ 21, 23-31	4th-5th FMS rst.; IS rst.4
19	Infinite Aura	«f	19-21, 23-31	
18	Minor Aura	«f	18-21, 23-31	•«
`232
TABLE 5.7 — Continued
B. Trainees
	Old Realm	Death Con- SCIOUSNESS	New Realm	Rebirth Con- sciousness
17	Radiant Lustre	2nd-3rd FMS rst.	17-21, 23-31	2nd-5th FMS rst.; IS rst. 4
16	Infinite Lustre	•I	16-21’ 23-31	91
15	Minor Lustre	•I	15-21’ 23-31	ft
14	Maha Brahma	1st FMS rst.	14-21, 23-31	1-5 FMS rst.; IS rst. 4
13	Brahma's Ministers	•I	13-21’ 23-31	w
12	Brahma's Retinue	•I	12-21’ 23-31	w
11	Paramimmita- vasavatti	3-rtd. SS rst. 4	5-21, 23-31	3-rtd. SS rst. 4; FMS rst. 5; IS rst. 4
10	Nimmanarati	Same as 11	Same as 11	Same as 11
6-9	Tusita, etc.	"	»•	"
5	Human	•I	if	if
`233
CHAPTER VI
COMPENDIUM OF MATTER
(Rupasangahavibhaga)

§1 Introductory Verse
|6.1
Having thus far analyzed consciousness and mental factors in accordance with their classes and modes of occurrence, matter will now be dealt with.
|6.2
The compendium of matter is fivefold: enumeration, classification, origination, groups, and the modes of occurrence.
|
Guide to §1
The first five chapters of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha form, in a
way, a complete compendium dealing with various aspects of conscious
experience—with the 89 or 121 types of consciousness, with the 52
mental factors and their permutations, with the occurrence of conscious-
ness in cognitive processes and at rebirth, with the planes of existence,
and with the classification of kamma and its result.
These first five chapters may be considered a detailed analysis of the
first two ultimate realities—citta and cetasikas, consciousness and mental
factors. In Chapter VI Acariya Anuruddha will analyze in detail the third
ultimate reality, matter {rupa). He will first enumerate the kinds of ma-
terial phenomena; then he will explain the principles by which they are
classified, their causes or means of origination, their organization into
groups, and their modes of occurrence. Finally he will conclude the
chapter with a brief look at the fourth ultimate reality, the unconditioned
element, Nibbana.
The Pali word for matter, rupa, is explained by derivation from the
verb ruppati, which means “to be deformed, disturbed, knocked about,
oppressed, broken.”1 The commentators maintain that “matter is so called
`235
because it undergoes and imposes alteration owing to adverse physical
conditions such as cold and heat, etc.”2 The Buddha himself, in expla-
nation of the term “matter” or “material form,” declares: “And why,
monks, do you say material form {rupa)! It is deformed (ruppati), there-
fore it is called material form. Deformed by what? Deformed by cold,
by heat, by hunger, by thirst, by flies, mosquitoes, wind, sunburn, and
creeping things” (S.22:79/iii, 86).
Enumeration of Material Phenomena
(rOpasamuddesa)
§2 In Brief: Great Essentials and Derived Matter
|6.3
Matter is twofold, namely: the four great essentials, and material phenomena derived from the four great essentials. These two constitute eleven categories.
|
Guide to §2
Matter is twofold: The Abhidhamma enumerates twenty-eight types
of material phenomena, which are briefly comprised in two general cate-
gories: the four great essentials and material phenomena derived from
the four great essentials. The four great essentials (malmbhnta) are the
primary material elements—earth, water, fire, and air. These are the
fundamental constituents of matter which are inseparable and which, in
their various combinations, enter into the composition of all material
substances, from the most minute particle to the most massive moun-
tain. Derived material phenomena (upadaya rupa) are material phenom-
ena derived from, or dependent upon, the four great essentials. These
are twenty-four in number. The great essentials may be compared to the
earth, the derivative phenomena to trees and shrubs that grow in depend-
ence on the earth.
All these twenty-eight types of material phenomena are distributed
into eleven general classes. Seven of these are called concretely produced
matter (nipphannarUpa), since they possess intrinsic natures and are thus
suitable for contemplation and comprehension by insight. The other four
classes, being more abstract in nature, are called non-concretely produced
matter (anipphannarfipa). (See Table 6.1.)
`236
TABLE 6.1:
THE 28 MATERIAL PHENOMENA AT A GLANCE
Earth element
Water element
Fire element
Air element
Production
Continuity
Decay
Impermanence
II.	Sensitive Phenomena
5.	Eye-sensitivity
6.	Ear-sensitivity
7.	Nose-sensitivity
8.	Tongue-sensitivity
9.	Body-sensitivity
III.	Objective Phenomena
10.	Visible form
11 • Sound
12.	Smell
13.	Taste
*. Tangibility (= 3 elements:
earth, fire, air)
Concretely Produced Matter (18)
I.	Great Essentials
Non-Concrete Matter (10)
VIII.	Limiting Phenomenon
19.	Space element
IX.	Comniunica ting Phenomena
20.	Bodily intimation
21.	Vocal intimation
X.	Mutable Phenomena
22.	Lightness
23.	Malleability
24.	Wieldiness
(plus two intimations)
XI.	Characteristics of Matter
1.
2.
3.
4.
25.
26.
27.
28.
IV.	Sexual Phenomena
14.	Femininity
15.	Masculinity
V.	Heart Phenomenon
16.	Heart-base
VI.	Life Phenomenon
17.	Life faculty
VII.	Nutritional Phenomenon
18.	Nutriment

`237
§3 In Detail: Concretely Produced Matter
|6.4
How?
(1) Essential material phenomena: the earth element, the water element, the fire element, and the air element.
|6.5
(2) Sensitive material phenomena: eye, ear, nose, tongue, and body.
|6.6
(3) Objective material phenomena: visible form, sound, smell, taste, and tangibility, the latter consisting in the three essentials excluding the water element.
|6.7
(4) Material phenomena of sex: femininity and masculinity.
|6.8
(5) Material phenomenon of the heart: the heart-base.
|6.9
(6) Material phenomenon of life: the life faculty.
|6.10
(7) Material phenomenon of nutriment: edible food.
|6.11
Thus these eighteen kinds of material phenomena are grouped together as: matter possessing intrinsic nature, matter possessing real characteristics, concretely produced matter, material matter, and matter to be comprehended by insight.
|
Guide to §3
(1) The earth element (pathavidhatu)'. The great essentials are called
elements {dhatu) in the sense that they bear their own intrinsic natures
(attano sabhavam dharenti). The earth element is so called because, like
the earth, it serves as a support or foundation for the coexisting material
phenomena. The word pathavl comes from a root meaning to expand
`238
or spread out, and thus the earth element represents the principle of
extension. The earth element has the characteristic of hardness, the
function of acting as a foundation (for the other primary elements and
derived matter), and manifestation as receiving.3 Its proximate cause is
the other three great essentials. Both hardness and softness are modes
in which the earth element is experienced by the sense of touch.
The water element (apodhatu): The water element, or fluidity, is
the material factor that makes different particles of matter cohere, thereby
preventing them from being scattered about. Its characteristic is trick-
ling or oozing, its function is to intensify the coexisting material states,
and it is manifested as the holding together or cohesion of material phe-
nomena. Its proximate cause is the other three great essentials. The
Abhidhamma holds that unlike the other three great essentials, the wa-
ter element cannot be physically sensed but must be known inferentially
from the cohesion of observed matter.
The fire element (tejodhatu) has the characteristic of heat, its func-
tion is to mature or ripen other material phenomena, and it is manifested
as a continuous supply of softness. Both heat and cold are modes in which
the fire element is experienced.
The air element (yayodhatu) is the principle of motion and pres-
sure. Its characteristic is distension (vitthambana), its function is to cause
motion in the other material phenomena, and it is manifested as con-
veyance to other places. Its proximate cause is the other three great es-
sentials. It is experienced as tangible pressure.
Taken together, the four great essentials are founded upon the earth
element, held together by the water element, maintained by the fire ele-
ment, and distended by the air element.
(2) Sensitive material phenomena {pasadarupa) are five types of
matter located in each of the five sense organs.4 The sensitivity is to be
distinguished from the gross sense organ which functions as its support.
What is conventionally called the eye is spoken of in the Abhidhamma
as the composite eye (sasambhcira-cakkhu), a compound of various
material phenomena. Among these is eye-sensitivity (cakkhu-pasada),
the sensitive substance in the retina that registers light and colour and
serves as a physical base and door for eye-consciousness. Ear-sensitiv-
ity {sota-pasada) is to be found inside the ear-hole, “in the place shaped
like a finger-stall and surrounded by fine brown hairs”； it is the sensi-
tive substance that registers sounds and serves as a physical base and
door for ear-consciousness. Nose-sensitivity (ghana-pasada) is to be
found inside the nasal orifice, as the substance that registers smells.
Tongue-sensitivity (jivha-pasada) is to be found diffused over the tongue,
serving to register tastes. And body-sensitivity (kaya-pasada) extends
`239
all over the organic body “like a liquid that soaks a layer of cotton,”
and serves to register tactile sensations.
The eye’s characteristic is sensitivity of the primary elements that is
ready for the impact of visible data; or its characteristic is sensitivity of
the primary elements springing from a desire to see. Its function is to
pick up a visible datum as object. It is manifested as the foundation of
eye-consciousness. Its proximate cause is the primary elements born of
kamma springing from a desire to see. Each of the other sensitive material
phenomena—the ear, the nose, the tongue, and the body—should be
similarly understood, with appropriate substitutions.
(3) Objective material phenomena (gocarariipa) are the five sense
fields which serve as the objective supports for the corresponding types
of sense consciousness. It should be noted that the tangible object is
constituted by three of the great essentials: the earth element, experi-
enced as hardness or softness; the fire element, experienced as heat or
cold; and the air element, experienced as pressure. The water element,
being the principle of cohesion, is not, according to the Abhidhamma,
included in the tangible datum. The other four sense objects —visible
forms, etc.—are types of derived matter.
Collectively, objective material phenomena have the characteristic of
impinging on the sense bases. Their function is to be the objects of sense
consciousness. They are manifested as the resort of the respective sense
consciousness. Their proximate cause is the four great essentials.
(4)	Material phenomena of sex (bhavarupa) are the two faculties
of femininity and masculinity. These faculties have, respectively, the
characteristic of the female sex and of the male sex. Their function is to
show femininity and masculinity. They are manifested as the reason for
the mark, sign, work, and ways of the female and of the male; that is, 
for the sexual structure of the body, for its feminine or masculine fea-
tures, for the typical feminine or masculine occupations, and for the
typical feminine or masculine deportment.
(5)	Material phenomenon of the heart (hadayarupa): On the heart-
base, see III, §20. The heart-base has the characteristic of being the
material support for the mind element and the mind-consciousness
element (see III, §21). Its function is to uphold them. It is manifested
as the carrying of these elements. It is to be found in dependence on the
blood inside the heart, and is assisted by the four great essentials and
maintained by the life faculty.
(6)	The life faculty {jivitindriya) is the material counterpart of the
mental life faculty, one of the seven universal cetasikas. Life, or vital-
ity, is called a faculty because it has a dominating influence over its
adjuncts. The life faculty has the characteristic of maintaining the
`240
coexistent kinds of matter at the moment of their presence. Its function
is to make them occur. It is manifested as the establishment of their pres-
ence. Its proximate cause is the four great essentials that are to be main-
tained.
(7) Edible food (kabalikarahara) has the characteristic of nutritive
essence (oja), that is, the nutritional substance contained in gross ed-
ible food. Its function is to sustain the physical body. It is manifested
as the fortifying of the body. Its proximate cause is gross edible food,
which is the base of nutritive essence.
These eighteen kinds of material phenomena: The eighteen mate-
rial phenomena just enumerated are grouped together as matter possess-
ing intrinsic nature (sabhavarfipa) because each type has a distinct
objective nature such as hardness in the case of the earth element, etc.;
as matter possessing real characteristics {salakkhanarupa) because they
are marked by the three general characteristics of impermanence, suf-
fering, and non-self; as concretely produced matter (nipphannariipa)
because they are directly produced by conditions such as kamma, etc.;
as material matter (rUparUpa) because they possess matter’s essential
characteristic of undergoing deformation; and as matter to be compre-
hended by insight {sammasanarUpa) because they are to be made the
objects of insight contemplation by way of the three characteristics.
§4 In Detail: Non-Concretely Produced Matter
|6.12
(8) Limiting material phenomenon: the element of space.
|6.13
(9) Intimating material phenomena: bodily intimation and vocal intimation.
|6.14
(10) Mutable material phenomena: material lightness, malleability, wieldiness, and the two forms of intimation.
|6.15
(11) Characteristics of material phenomena: material production, continuity, decay, and impermanence.
|6.16
Here by production and continuity are meant the material phenomenon of birth Thus the eleven kinds of material phenomena are treated as twenty-eight according to their specific properties. 
|6.17
How (twenty-eight)?
Essentials, sensory organs, objects, sex, heart, life, and nutriment —thus concrete matter is eighteenfold.
Limitation (space), intimation, mutability, and characteristics —thus there are ten that are not concretely produced. In all there are twenty-eight.
Herein, this is the enumeration of matter.
|
`241
Guide to §4
Non-concretely produced matter: The types of matter in groups (8)-
(11) are designated non-concretely produced matter (anipphannariipa)
because they do not arise directly from the four main causes of matter
(see §9) but exist as modalities or attributes of concretely produced
matter. Thus they are not included among the ultimate realities
{paramattha dhamma).
(8)	The space element (akasadhatu): Space, as understood in the
Abhidhamma, is not bare geometric extension but the void region that
delimits and separates objects and groups of material phenomena, en-
abling them to be perceived as distinct. The space element has the char-
acteristic of delimiting matter. Its function is to display the boundaries
of matter. It is manifested as the confines of matter, or as the state of
gaps and apertures. Its proximate cause is the matter delimited.
(9)	Intimating material phenomena {vihnattirupa): Vinnatti,
intimation, is that by means of which one communicates one’s ideas,
feelings, and attitudes to another. There are two means of intimation, 
bodily and vocal. The former is a special modification in the con-
sciousness-originated air element which causes the body to move in ways
that reveal one’s intentions. The latter is a special modification in the
consciousness-originated earth element which issues in speech by which
one reveals one’s intentions. Both have the function of displaying inten-
tion. They are manifested, respectively, as a cause of bodily movement
and of verbal expression. Their proximate causes are, respectively, the
air element and the earth element born of consciousness.
(10)	Mutable material phenomena {vikararupa): This category com-
prises special modes or manifestations of concretely produced matter.
It includes the two types of intimation and three other material phenom-
ena: lightness, malleability, and wieldiness.
Among these, lightness {lahuta) has the characteristic of non-slug-
gishness. Its function is to dispel heaviness in matter. It is manifested
as light transformability. Its proximate cause is light matter.
Malleability {muduta) has the characteristic of non-rigidity. Its func-
tion is to dispel rigidity in matter. It is manifested as non-opposition to
any kind of action. Its proximate cause is malleable matter.
Wieldiness {kammannata) has the characteristic of wieldiness that is
favourable to bodily action. Its function is to dispel unwieldiness. It is
manifested as non-weakness. Its proximate cause is wieldy matter.
(11)	Characteristics of material phenomena (lakkhanarupa): This
category includes four types of material phenomena. Of these, produc-
tion (upacaya) and continuity (santati) are both terms for the genesis,
arising, or birth (jati) of matter. They differ in that production is the
`242
first arising of a material process, the initial launching or setting up of
the process, while continuity is the repeated genesis of material phenom-
ena in the same material process. For example, the arising of the body, 
sex and heart groups at conception is production, while the subsequent
arising of those same material groups throughout life is continuity.
Production of matter has the characteristic of setting up. Its function
is to make material instances emerge for the first time. It is manifested
as launching or as the completed state. Its proximate cause is the matter
produced.
Continuity of matter has the characteristic of occurrence. Its function
is to anchor. It is manifested as non-interruption. Its proximate cause is
matter to be anchored.
Decay (jarata) has the characteristic of the maturing or aging of
material phenomena. Its function is to lead them on towards their ter-
mination. It is manifested as loss of newness without loss of being. Its
proximate cause is matter that is decaying.
Impermanence (aniccata) has the characteristic of the complete
breaking up of material phenomena. Its function is to make them sub-
side. It is manifested as destruction and falling away. Its proximate
cause is matter that is completely breaking up.
§5 Twenty-eight Kinds of Matter

`243
Classification of Matter
§6 As Singlefold
|6.18
Now all this matter is singlefold in so far as it is all: rootless, with conditions, subject to taints, conditioned, mundane, pertaining to the sense-sphere, objectless, not to be abandoned. However, when conceived as internal and external, etc., matter becomes manifold.
|
Guide to §6
All this matter is singlefold: All matter is rootless because it does
not associate with either the wholesome, unwholesome, or indetermi-
nate roots, association with roots being restricted to mental phenomena.
All matter is with conditions because it arises dependent on the four
causes (see §9 below). It is subject to taints (sasava) because it can be
made an object of the four taints (see VII, §3).5 It is all conditioned and
mundane because there is no matter that transcends the world of the five
clinging aggregates. All matter is of the sense sphere: though matter
exists in the fine-material plane, it pertains by its nature to the sense
sphere because it is the object of sensual craving. Matter is objectless
because, unlike mental phenomena, it cannot know an object; and it is
not to be abandoned because it cannot be abandoned, like the defile-
ments, by the four supramundane paths.
§7 As Manifold
`244
|6.19
How?
The five kinds of sensitive material phenomena are internal; the rest are external.
|6.20
The six kinds, comprising the sensitive organs and the heart, are material phenomena that are bases; the rest are not bases.
|6.21
The seven kinds, comprising the sensitive organs and (the two) media of intimation, are material phenomena that are doors; the rest are not doors.
|6.22
The eight kinds, comprising the sensitive organs, sex states and life, are material phenomena that are faculties; the rest are not faculties.
|6.23
The twelve kinds, comprising the five sensitive organs and (seven) sense objects, are gross, proximate, and impinging material phenomena; the rest are subtle, distant, and non-impinging.
|6.24
Material phenomena born of kamma are “clung-to”； the others are “not clung-to.”
|6.25
The visible form base is visible; the rest are non-visible.
|6.26
Eye and ear, as not reaching (their object), and nose, tongue and body, as reaching (their object), are five kinds of material phenomena that take objects; the others are material phenomena that do not
take objects.
|6.27
Colour, odour, taste, nutritive essence, and the four essentials are the eight kinds of material phenomena that are inseparable; the rest are separable.
|
`245
Guide to §7
Internal (ajjhattika): Here, the term “internal” is used in relation to
matter in a technical sense applicable only to the five types of sensitive
materiality which serve as the doors for the mental phenomena. Although
other types of material phenomena occur within the physical body, only
these five sensitive factors are referred to as internal.
Bases (vatthu): see III, §20.
Doors (dvara): The five sensitive material phenomena are doors of
cognition, that is, media for consciousness and mental factors to encoun-
ter their objects. Bodily and vocal intimation are doors of action, that
is, channels for bodily and verbal deeds.
Faculties {indriya): The sensitivities are so called because they ex-
ercise a controlling power {indra) in their respective spheres. Each of
these controls the coexistent material phenomena in exercising its spe-
cific function, such as seeing, hearing, etc. The sex faculty controls the
manifestation of masculine or feminine features and traits. The life fac-
ulty controls the coexistent types of matter, as a pilot controls a ship.
Gross, proximate, and impinging material phenomena: These three
terms are used here in a technical sense which should not be confused
with their ordinary connotations. They are restricted in application to
the material phenomena that are instrumental in the genesis of sense
consciousness, and imply nothing about the relative size or nearness of
the object. These phenomena are twelvefold—the five sensitive organs
and the seven objective data—the tangible base being reckoned as three-
fold because it consists of three great essentials.
Those material phenomena which do not directly contribute to the
arising of sense consciousness are called subtle, distant, and non-imping-
ing, again, regardless of their size and distance.
Clung-to (upadimia): The eighteen kinds of matter born of kamma
are known as “clung-to, ” because they have been acquired as the fruits
of kamma motivated by craving and wrong view. Matter produced by
causes other than kamma is known as “not clung-to.” Generally, however,
in a less technical sense, all organic matter in the body is referred to as
“clung-to,” while inorganic matter is spoken of as “not clung-to.” It
should be noted that, unlike the other pairs of terms used for the purpose
of classification, the pair “clung-to” and “not clung-to” does not establish
a mutually exclusive dichotomy, for nine kinds of material phenomena
born of kamma can also originate from other causes (see below, §17).
Eye and ear, as not reaching (their object): According to the
Abhidhamma, the eye and ear are regarded as sense organs that do not
reach or touch (asampatta) their respective objects. For the eye or ear
to serve as a base for consciousness, its objects must be non-contiguous.
`246
In contrast, the other three sense organs, it is held, directly touch
(sampatta) their objects.
Material phenomena that take objects: The Pali expression
gocaraggahika is used figuratively to indicate that the five sense organs
serve as the bases for the consciousnesses that arise with their support.
But the sense organs, being matter, cannot literally apprehend objects.
Rather, it is the sense consciousnesses based on them that actually cog-
nize the objects.
Material phenomena that are inseparable: The four great essen-
tials and four derivatives—colour, smell, taste, and nutritive essence —
are known as inseparable matter (avinibbhogarupa) because they are
always bound together and are present in all material objects from the
simplest to the most complex. The other types of material phenomena
may be present or not, and are thus regarded as separable. A material
group (kalcipa) that consists solely of these eight elements is known as a
“pure octad” {suddhatthaka) or a “group with nutritive essence as eighth”
(ojatthamaka).
§8 Summary
|6.28
Thus the wise analyze in a fitting way the twenty-eight kinds of matter with respect to such divisions as the internal and so forth.
Herein, this is the classification of matter.
|
Guide to §8
For a schematic representation of the classifications of material phenomena, also in regard to their modes of origin and formation into groups, see Table 6.3 at the end of this chapter.
The Origination of Matter
(rOpasamutthana)
§9 The Four Modes of Origin
`247
|6.29
Material phenomena originate in four ways, from kamma, consciousness, temperature, and nutriment.
§10 Kamma as a Mode of Origin
|6.30
Therein, the twenty-five kinds of wholesome and unwholesome kamma pertaining to the sense sphere and the fine-material sphere produce, in one’s internal continuum, volitionally conditioned material phenomena originating from kamma, moment by moment beginning with rebirth-linking.
|
Guide to §10
Material phenomena originating from kamma {kammasam-
iitthanarupa): Kamma here refers to volition (cetana) in past whole-
some and unwholesome states of consciousness. The twenty-five kinds
of kamma that produce material phenomena are the volitions of the
twelve unwholesome cittas, the eight great wholesome cittas, and the
five fine-material wholesome cittas. The volitions of the wholesome
immaterial-sphere cittas generate rebirth in the immaterial plane and thus
cannot produce material phenomena originating from kamma.
Kamma produces material phenomena at each sub-moment among
the three sub-moments of consciousness—arising, presence, and disso-
lution —starting with the arising sub-moment of the rebirth-linking con-
sciousness; it continues to do so throughout the course of existence up
to the seventeenth mind-moment preceding the death consciousness.
Eighteen kinds of material phenomena are produced by kamma: the eight
inseparables in the nine groups produced by kamma (see §17); the five
sensitivities; the two sex faculties; the life faculty; the heart-base; and
space. Of these, nine kinds—the eight faculties and the heart-base—arise
exclusively from kamma. The other nine kinds arise from kamma only
when they occur in the kamma-born groups; otherwise they originate
from the other causes.
§11 Consciousness as a Mode of Origin
`248
|6.31
The seventy-five types of consciousness, excluding the immaterial-sphere resultants and the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness, produce material phenomena originating from consciousness beginning
with the first moment of the life-continuum, but they do so only (at the moment of) arising.
|6.32
Therein, the javanas of absorption also uphold the bodily postures.
|6.33
But the determining consciousness, javanas of the sense sphere, and direct-knowledge consciousness produce also (bodily and vocal) intimation. 
|6.34
Herein, the thirteen javanas accompanied by joy produce smiling too.
|
Guide to §11
Material phenomena originating from consciousness (cittasam-
utthana-rupa): Material phenomena produced by consciousness spring
up starting from the arising moment of the first bhavanga citta immedi-
ately after the rebirth consciousness. The rebirth consciousness does not
produce consciousness-born matter, since at the moment of rebirth the
matter that arises is born of kamma, and because this consciousness is a
newcomer to the new existence. The tenfold sense consciousness lacks
the power to produce matter, and the four immaterial resultants cannot
do so since they arise only in the immaterial realms. According to the
commentators mental phenomena are strongest at the moment of aris-
ing, material phenomena strongest at the moment of presence. Conscious-
ness therefore produces matter only at its arising moment, when it is
strongest, not at the moments of presence and dissolution.
The javanas of absorption, etc.: The maintenance or upholding of
the bodily postures is a function of states of consciousness. The twenty-
six javanas of absorption perform this function minimally, by maintaining
the body in a sitting, standing, or lying position. The other thirty-two
cittas mentioned—the determining consciousness, sense-sphere javanas,
and direct-knowledge cittas —not only uphold the postures but also ac-
tivate bodily and vocal intimation.
Thirteen ... produce smiling too: An ordinary worldling may smile
or laugh with any of the four cittas rooted in greed and accompanied by
joy, or with any of the four great wholesome cittas accompanied by joy.
Trainees smile with six of these cittas, the two connected with wrong
view being excluded. Arahants may smile with one of five cittas—the
four joyful great functionals and the rootless smile-producing citta.
On how different types of consciousness produce various material
phenomena, see Table 6.2.
`249
TABLE 6.2: CONSCIOUSNESS AS A CAUSE
OF MATERIAL PHENOMENA
CITTAS	No. of Cittas	Consness.-born Matter	Postures	§ .运 £	Smiling
Greed-rooted - joy	4	+	+	+	+
-equanimity	4	+	+	+	 —
Hate-rooted	2	+	+	+	 —
Delusion-rooted	2	+	+	+	 —
Sense consciousness	10	—	 —	 —	 —
Receiving	2	+	_	_	_
Investigating	3	+	—	—	—
Five-door adverting	1	+	—	—	—
Mind-door adverting	1	+	+	+	_
Smile-producing	1	+	+	+	+
SS wholesome - joy
SS wholesome - equanimity
SS resultant
SS functional - joy
•’ - equanimity
FMS wholesome
"resultant
"functional
IS wholesome
"resultant
"functional
Supramundane
Direct knowledge
`250
§12 Temperature as a Mode of Origin
|6.35
The fire element, which comprises both cold and heat, on reaching its stage of presence, produces, according to circumstances, both internal and external material phenomena originating from temperature.
|
Guide to §12
Material phenomena originating from temperature {utusam-
utthanarupa): Beginning from the stage of presence at the moment of
rebirth-linking, the internal fire element found in the material groups born
of kamma combines with the external fire element and starts producing
organic material phenomena originating from temperature. Thereafter the
fire element in the material groups born of all four causes produces or-
ganic material phenomena born of temperature throughout the course
of existence. Externally, temperature or the fire element also produces
inorganic material phenomena, such as climatic and geological trans-
formations.
§13 Nutriment as a Mode of Origin
|6.36
Nutriment, known as nutritive essence, on reaching its stage of presence, produces material phenomena originating from nutriment at the time it is swallowed.
|
Guide to §13
Material phenomena originating from nutriment {aharasam-
uttlianarupa): The internal nutritive essence, supported by the external,
produces material phenomena at the moment of presence starting from
the time it is swallowed. The nutritive essence that has reached pres-
ence in the material groups originating from nutriment produces a fur-
ther pure octad, and the nutritive essence in that octad originates still a
further octad; thus the occurrence of octads links up ten or twelve times.
The nutriment taken by a pregnant mother, pervading the body of the
embryo, originates materiality in the child. Even nutriment smeared on
the body is said to originate materiality. The nutritive essence in the
`251
internal groups born of the other three causes also originates several
occurrences of pure octads in succession. The nutriment taken on one
day can support the body for as long as seven days.
§14 Analysis by way of Origins
|6.37
Therein, the material phenomena of the heart and the (eight) faculties are bom of kamma.
|6.38
The two media of intimation are born only of consciousness.
|6.39
Sound is born of consciousness and temperature.
|6.40
The triple qualities of lightness, (malleability, and wieldiness) arise from temperature, consciousness, and nutriment. 
|6.41
The inseparable material phenomena and the element of space arise from four causes.
|6.42
Characteristic material phenomena do not arise from any cause.
|
Guide to §14
Articulate sounds are caused by consciousness, inarticulate sounds
by temperature. The triple qualities of lightness, malleability, and
wieldiness arise from favourable climatic conditions, a buoyant state of
mind, and wholesome nutriment, while unfavourable climate, depressed
states of mind, and unwholesome nutriment cause heaviness, rigidity,
and unwieldiness in the physical body. The space element occurs as the
interstices between the material groups born of the four causes, and there-
fore it is regarded as being derivatively born of the four causes. The
reason why the characteristics do not arise from any cause is explained
in the next section.
§15 Summary
`252
|6.43
Eighteen, fifteen, thirteen, and twelve arise respectively from kamma, consciousness, temperature, and nutriment.
|6.44
It is explained that the characteristics (of material phenomena) are not produced by any (modes of origin) since their intrinsic nature consists solely in the qualities of being produced, etc.
Herein, this is the origination of matter.
|
Guide to §15
The eighteen that arise from kamma are: 8 inseparables + 8 faculties + heart-base + space.
The fifteen that arise from consciousness are: 8 inseparables + 5 mutables + sound + space.
The thirteen that arise from temperature are: 8 inseparables + lightness triad + sound + space.
The twelve that arise from nutriment are: 8 inseparables + lightness triad + space.
The twenty-eight material phenomena can be further classified according to their number of causes as follows:
one cause: 8 faculties + heart-base + 2 intimations =11;
two causes: sound = 1;
three causes: lightness triad = 3;
four causes: 8 inseparables + space = 9;
causeless: characteristics = 4.
The Grouping of Material Phenomena
[kalapayojan^)
§16 In Brief
|6.45
There are twenty-one material groups inasmuch as they arise together, cease together, have a common basis, and occur together.
|
Guide to §16
Material phenomena do not occur singly, but in combinations or
groups known as rUpcikalapas, of which twenty-one are enumerated. Just
as all the cetasikas possess four characteristics (see II, §1), so too do
the material phenomena in a group. All the material phenomena in a
group arise together and cease together. They have a common base,
`253
namely, the conascent great essentials, which are the proximate cause
for the derivative phenomena as well as for each other. And they all occur
together from their arising to their cessation.
§17 Groups Originating from Kamma
|6.46
Therein, life and the (eight) inseparable material phenomena together with the eye are called the eye decad. Similarly, (by joining the former nine) together with the ear and so forth, the ear decad,
nose decad, tongue decad, body decad, female decad, male decad, (heart-)base decad, should respectively be formed. Inseparable material phenomena, together with life, are called the vital nonad. These nine groups originate from kamma.
|
§18 Groups Originating from Consciousness
|6.47
The inseparable material phenomena constitute the “pure octad.” They, together with bodily intimation, constitute the bodily intimation nonad; together with vocal intimation and sound, the vocal intimation decad; together with the material phenomena of the lightness triad, the un-decad of the lightness triad; the dodecad of bodily intimation and the lightness triad; and the tridecad of vocal intimation, sound, and the lightness triad. These six material groups originate from consciousness.
|
§19 Groups Originating from Temperature
`254
|6.48
The pure octad, the sound nonad, the un-decad of the lightness triad; the dodecad of sound and the lightness triad —these four originate from temperature.
|
§20 Groups Originating from Nutriment
|6.49
The pure octad and the un-decad of the lightness triad are the two
material groups that originate from nutriment.
|
§21 The Internal and External
|6.50
Of them, the two material groups produced by temperature —the pure octad and the sound nonad —are found externally too. All the rest are strictly internal.
|
§22 Summary
|6.51
There are twenty-one material groups—nine, six, four, and two produced in due order from kamma, consciousness, temperature, and nutriment.
As space demarcates, and the characteristic marks just indicate, the wise state that they are not constituents of material groups.
Herein, this is the grouping of material phenomena.
|
Guide to §22
The nine groups produced by kamma are: (1) the eye decad; (2) the ear decad; (3) the nose decad; (4) the tongue decad; (5) the body decad; (6) the female decad; (7) the male decad; (8) the heart-base decad; (9) the vital nonad.
`255
The six groups produced by consciousness are: (1) the pure octad;
(2) the bodily intimation decad; (3) the vocal intimation decad; (4) the
lightness triad un-decad; (5) the bodily intimation and lightness triad
dodecad; (6) the vocal intimation, sound, and lightness triad tridecad.
The four groups produced by temperature are: (1) the pure octad; (2)
the sound nonad; (3) the lightness triad un-decad; (4) the sound and light-
ness triad dodecad.
The two groups produced by nutriment are: (1) the pure octad; (2)
the lightness triad un-decad.
The Occurrence of Material Phenomena
(rOpappa vattikkama)
§23 In the Sensuous World
|6.52
All these material phenomena are obtained with no deficiency, according to circumstances, during the course of existence in the sensuous world. But at rebirth-linking, to moisture-born beings and
to those of spontaneous birth, there arise at most the seven decads— the decads of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, sex, and the heart-base.
|6.53
As a minimum, sometimes the eye, ear, nose, and sex decads are not obtained. This is how deficiencies of material groups should be understood.
|6.54
To the womb-born creatures there arise (at rebirth) three decads —the decads of body, sex, and the heart-base. Sometimes, however, the sex decad is not obtained. Thereafter, during the course of existence, gradually there arise the eye decad and so forth.
|
`256
Guide to §23
The present section deals with the manner in which these material
groups come into being at the moment of conception, during the course
of existence, and in different realms. According to Buddhism there are
four kinds of birth, namely, egg-born beings (andaja), womb-born be-
ings (jalcibuja), moisture-born beings (samsedaja), and beings having
spontaneous birth {opapatika). Moisture-born beings include certain
lowly forms of animal life. Beings having a spontaneous birth are gen-
erally invisible to the physical eye. Petas and devas usually belong to
this class. By the mention of “womb-born creatures” in the text, egg-
born beings are also implicitly included.
§24 The Continuity of Occurrence
|6.55
Thus the continuity of material groups produced in four ways—namely, kamma-born from the time of rebirth-linking, consciousness born from the second moment of consciousness, temperature-born from the time of the stage of presence, nutriment-born from the time of the diffusion of nutritive essence —uninterruptedly flows on in the sense sphere till the end of life, like the flame of a lamp or the stream of a river.
|
`257
§25 At the Time of Death
|6.56
But at the time of death, kamma-born material phenomena no longer arise starting with the stage of presence of the seventeenth consciousness preceding the death consciousness. Kamma-born material phenomena that arose earlier occur till the death-moment and then cease. Following that, the consciousness-born and nutriment-born
material phenomena come to cessation. Thereafter, a continuity of material qualities produced by temperature persists in the form of the corpse.
|
§26 Verse
|6.57
Thus to the deceased beings, again in a subsequent life, material phenomena arise, starting from rebirth-linking, in the same way.
|
§27 In the Fine-material World
|6.58
In the fine-material world, the decads of nose, tongue, body, sex, and the material groups produced by nutriment are not found. Therefore, to those beings, at the time of rebirth-linking there arise four material groups produced by kamma—the three decads of eye, ear, and heart-base, and the vital nonad. During the course of existence, material phenomena produced by consciousness and by temperature are found.
|
Guide to §27
The beings in the fine-material realms, being asexual, lack the two
decads of sex, and though they possess the physical forms of the nose,
tongue and body, these organs are destitute of sense receptivity.
§28 Among Non-Percipient Beings
|6.59
Among the non-percipient beings, the eye, ear, heart-base, and sound are also not found. Similarly, no consciousness-born material phenomena are found. Therefore, at the moment of their rebirth-linking,
only the vital nonad arises. During the course of existence, material phenomena produced by temperature, with the exception of sound,continue.
|
`258
§29 Summary
|6.60
Thus in the three cases of the sensuous world, the fine-material world, and non-percipient beings, the occurrence of material phenomena should be understood as twofold, by way of rebirth-linking and
the course of existence.
|6.61
In the sense planes, twenty-eight material phenomena are found; in the fine-material planes, twenty-three; among the non-percipients, seventeen; but none in the immaterial plane.
At the moment of conception, sound, mutability, decay, and death are not found. In the course of existence, there is nothing that is not obtained.
Herein, this is the procedure regarding the occurrence of material phenomena.
|
Nibbana
§30 Definition
|6.62
Nibbana is termed supramundane, and is to be realized by the knowledge of the four paths. It becomes an object to the paths and fruits, and is called Nibbana because it is a departure from craving, which is an entanglement.
|
`259
Guide to §30
Nibbana is termed supramundane: The concluding section of this
chapter deals briefly with the fourth ultimate reality, Nibbana.
Etymologically, the word nibbana —the Pali form of the better known
Sanskrit nirvana—is derived from a verb nibbati meaning “to be blown
out” or “to be extinguished.” It thus signifies the extinguishing of the
worldly “fires” of greed, hatred, and delusion. But the Pali commenta-
tors prefer to treat it as the negation of, or “departure from” (nik-
khcmtatta), the entanglement (vana) of craving, the derivation which is
offered here. For as long as one is entangled by craving, one remains
bound in samsara, the cycle of birth and death; but when all craving
has been extirpated, one attains Nibbana, deliverance from the cycle of
birth and death.
§31 Analysis
|6.63
Though Nibbana is onefold according to its intrinsic nature, by reference to a basis (for distinction), it is twofold, namely, the element of Nibbana with the residue remaining, and the element of Nibbana without the residue remaining. 
|6.64
It is threefold according to its different aspects, namely, void, signless, and desireless.
|
Guide to §31
Though Nibbana is onefold according to its intrinsic nature, etc.:
Nibbana is a single undifferentiated ultimate reality. It is exclusively
supramundane, and has one intrinsic nature (sabhava), which is that of
being the unconditioned deathless element totally transcendent to the
conditioned world. Nevertheless, by reference to a basis for distinction,
Nibbana is said to be twofold. The basis for distinction is the presence
or absence of the five aggregates. The element of Nibbana as experi-
enced by Arahants is called “with the residue remaining” (sa-upadisesa)
because, though the defilements have all been extinguished, the “resi-
due” of aggregates acquired by past clinging remains through the dura-
tion of the Arahant’s life. The element of Nibbana attained with the
Arahant’s demise is called that “without the residue remaining”
(anupSdisesa), because the five aggregates are discarded and are never
`260
acquired again. The two elements of Nibbana are also called, in the
Commentaries, the extinguishment of the defilements (kilesa-
parinibbana) and the extinguishment of the aggregates (khandha-
parinibbana).
It is threefold according to its different aspects: Nibbana is called
the void (suhhata) because it is devoid of greed, hatred, and delusion, 
and because it is devoid of all that is conditioned. It is called signless
{animitta) because it is free from the signs of greed, etc., and free from
the signs of all conditioned things. It is called desireless (appanihita)
because it is free from the hankering of greed, etc., and because it is
not desired by craving.
§32 Summary
|6.65
Great seers who are free from craving declare that Nibbana is an objective state which is deathless, absolutely endless, unconditioned, and unsurpassed.
Thus as fourfold the Tathagatas reveal the ultimate realities—consciousness, mental factors, matter, and Nibbana.
Thus ends the sixth chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Matter.
|
`264
CHAPTER VII
COMPENDIUM OF CATEGORIES
(Samuccayasangahavibhdga)
§1 Introductory Verse
|7.1
The seventy-two kinds of entities have (already) been described with their characteristics. Now I will speak of their categories in the ways that are applicable.
|
Guide to §1
The seventy-two kinds of entities: The four ultimate realities that
have been described in the first six chapters can be analyzed into seventy-
two distinct entities (vatthudhammci), that is, phenomena which exist with
intrinsic natures (sabhava—see I, §2).
1. Consciousness, though divided into eighty-nine types, is regarded
as one entity because all cittas have the same intrinsic nature—
the cognizing of an object.
2. The fifty-two cetasikas are viewed each as a distinct ultimate
entity since each mental factor has its own individual intrinsic
nature.
3. The eighteen concretely produced material phenomena are, for
the same reason, each reckoned separately as individual entities.
4. Nibbana, which is one in essence, counts as a single entity.
Although the ten kinds of non-concretely produced matter are ex-
pounded under the heading of the ultimate realities, they are not con-
sidered to be concrete entities because they lack intrinsic natures and
thus do not enter into the range of insight contemplation.
I will speak of their categories: Having described the four ultimate
realities with their seventy-two constituents, the author will now show
how they are grouped into the various categories employed for classifi-
cation in the Abhidhamma Pitaka.
`265
§2 Enumeration of Categories
|7.2
The compendium of categories should be understood as fourfold:
(i) the compendium of the unwholesome;
(ii) the compendium of mixed categories;
(iii) the compendium of requisites of enlightenment; and
(iv) the compendium of the whole.
|
Compendium of the Unwholesome
(akusalasangaha)
§3 Taints
|7.3
How? First, in the compendium of the unwholesome, there are four taints: (1) the taint of sensual desire, (2) the taint of (attachment to) existence, (3) the taint of wrong views, (4) the taint of ignorance.
|
Guide to §3
The word asava means literally that which flows out. In Pali the word
denotes both pus oozing from an abscess and intoxicants which have
been fermented for a long time. The defilements classified as taints are
called asavas because they are similar to oozing pus and to fermented
intoxicants. The Commentaries state that the asavas are so called because
they flow right up to the topmost plane of existence or because they flow
up to change-of-lineage (gotrabhii—see IX, §34).
Of the four taints, the taint of sensual desire and the taint of (attach-
ment to) existence are both modes of the cetasika greed (lobha), directed
in the one case to sense pleasure, in the other to continued existence.
The taint of wrong view is identified as the cetasika wrong view (ditthi)
and the taint of ignorance as the cetasika delusion (moha).
§4 Floods
|7.4
Four floods: (1) the flood of sensual desire, (2) the flood of (attachment to) existence, (3) the flood of wrong views, (4) the flood of ignorance.
|
`266
§5 Bonds
|7.5
Four bonds: (1) the bond of sensual desire, (2) the bond of (attachment to) existence, (3) the bond of wrong views, (4) the bond of ignorance.
|
Guide to §§4-5
The same defilements that are called taints are also called floods
(ogha) because they sweep beings away into the ocean of existence, and
because they are hard to cross. They are further called bonds (yoga)
because they yoke beings to suffering and do not allow them to escape.
§6 Bodily Knots
|7.6
Four bodily knots: (1) the bodily knot of covetousness, (2) the bodily knot of ill will, (3) the bodily knot of adherence to rites and ceremonies, (4) the bodily knot of dogmatic belief that “This alone is the truth.”
|
Guide to §6
The bodily knots are so called because they tie the mind to the body
or the present body to bodies in future existences. Here the term “body”
(kaya) applies to both the mental and physical body in the sense of an
aggregation. Of the four knots, covetousness means craving or greed,
which pulls beings towards desirable objects. Ill will is identical with
the cetasika hatred, which is manifested as aversion towards undesir-
able objects. “Adherence to rites and ceremonies” is the belief that the
performance of rituals constitutes the means to liberation. Dogmatic belief
is the firm conviction that one’s own view is the only truth and that all
other views are false. These last two bodily knots are both aspects of
the cetasika wrong view.
`267
§7 Clingings
|7.7
Four clingings: (1) clinging to sense pleasures, (2) clinging to wrong views, (3) clinging to rites and ceremonies, (4) clinging to a doctrine of self.
|
Guide to §7
Of the four kinds of clinging, the first may be understood as intensified
craving for sense pleasures, though the Commentaries point out that this
kind of clinging can also be understood more broadly as craving for any
of the things of the world. Clinging to wrong views is the adoption of
any of the morally pernicious views such as nihilism, fatalism, etc., or
any of the speculative views about the eternal or non-eternal existence
of the world, etc.1 Clinging to rites and ceremonies is the wrong view
that the performance of rites and rituals or the undertaking of ascetic
practices and related observances can lead to liberation. Clinging to a
doctrine of self is the adoption of personality view (sakkayaditthi), the
identification of any of the five aggregates as a self or the accessories of
a self. The Suttas mention twenty types of personality view. These are
obtained by considering each of the five aggregates in four ways, thus:
“One regards materiality as self, or self as possessing materiality, or
materiality as in self, or self as in materiality.” The same is repeated
with respect to feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness.
(See e.g. M. 44/i,300.) The clinging to sense pleasures is a manifestation
of greed, the other three clingings are modes of the cetasika wrong view.
§8 Hindrances
|7.8
Six hindrances: the hindrances of (1) sensual desire, (2) ill will, (3) sloth and torpor, (4) restlessness and worry, (5) doubt, (6) ignorance.
|
Guide to §8
The hindrances are so called because they obstruct the way to a
heavenly rebirth and to the attainment of Nibbana. According to the
commentary the hindrances are mental factors which prevent unarisen
wholesome states from arising and which do not allow arisen wholesome
states to endure. The first five hindrances are the major obstacles to the
attainment of the jhanas, the sixth hindrance is the major obstacle to the
arising of wisdom.
`268
Altogether eight cetasikas are included among the hindrances. In two
cases, however, a pair of mental factors is counted as a single hindrance.
The Abhidhamma commentaries explain that sloth and torpor, and rest-
lessness and worry, are joined into compounds because of the similari-
ties in their respective functions, conditions, and antidotes. Sloth and
torpor both have the function of engendering mental sluggishness, they
are conditioned by laziness and drowsiness, and they are countered by
arousing energy. Restlessness and worry share the function of engen-
dering disquietude, they are conditioned by disturbing thoughts, and they
are countered by the development of calm.
§9 Latent Dispositions
|7.9
Seven latent dispositions: the latent dispositions to (1) sensual lust, (2) attachment to existence, (3) aversion, (4) conceit, (5) wrong views, (6) doubt, (7) ignorance.
|
Guide to §9
The latent dispositions (anusaya) are defilements which “lie along
with” (anusenti) the mental process to which they belong, rising to the
surface as obsessions whenever they meet with suitable conditions. The
term “latent dispositions” highlights the fact that the defilements are
liable to arise so long as they have not been eradicated by the supra-
mundane paths. Though all defilements are, in a sense, anusayas, the
seven mentioned here are the most prominent. Both sensual lust and
attachment to existence are modes of greed; the others are each distinct
cetasikas. Thus altogether six cetasikas function as amisayas.
§10 Fetters (Suttanta Method)
|7.10
Ten fetters, according to the Suttanta method: the fetters of (1) sensual lust, (2) attachment to fine-material existence, (3) attachment to immaterial existence, (4) aversion, (5) conceit, (6) wrong views, (7) adherence to rites and ceremonies, (8) doubt, (9) restlessness, (10) ignorance.
|
`269
§11 Fetters (Abhidhamma Method)
|7.11
Another ten fetters, according to the Abhidhamma method: the fetters of (1) sensual lust, (2) attachment to existence, (3) aversion, (4) conceit, (5) wrong views, (6) adherence to rites and ceremonies, (7) doubt, (8) envy, (9) avarice, (10) ignorance.
|
Guide to §§10-11
The fetters are unwholesome mental factors which bind beings to the
round of existence. The first set of ten fetters is mentioned both in the
Sutta Pitaka and in the Abhidhamma Pitaka, the second set only in the
Abhidhamma Pitaka. In the first set (l)-(3) are aspects of greed and (6)-
(7) aspects of wrong view; the rest are distinct cetasikas. In the second
set (l)-(2) are aspects of greed, (5)-(6) aspects of wrong view, and the
rest distinct cetasikas.
§12 Defilements
|7.12
Ten defilements: (1) greed, (2) hatred, (3) delusion, (4) conceit, (5) wrong views, (6) doubt, (7) sloth, (8) restlessness, (9) shamelessness, (10) fearlessness of wrongdoing.
|
Guide to §12
The defilements (kilesa) are so called because they afflict (kilissanti)
or torment the mind, or because they defile beings by dragging them
down to a mentally soiled and depraved condition.
`271
§13 A Clarification
|7.13
Herein, among the taints, etc., it is craving that is intended by the terms “sensual desire” and “(attachment to) existence, ” since it has them (i.e. sensuality and existence) as its basis. It is wrong view that is spoken of as “adherence to rites and ceremonies, ” “the dogmatic belief that This alone is the truth,” and “clinging to a doctrine of self”, because it occurs in such modes.
|
§14 Summary
|7.14
By way of entity, the taints, floods, bonds, and knots are threefold. There are two kinds of clinging spoken of and eight hindrances.
The latent dispositions are only six, and the fetters can be understood as nine. The defilements are ten. Thus the compendium of evil is stated as ninefold.
|
Guide to §14
This section attempts to show how the different categories of defile-
ments can be reduced to the fourteen unwholesome cetasikas. The re-
sults of this reduction can be seen in Table 7.1.
Compendium of Mixed Categories
(missakasangaha)
§15 Roots
|7.15
In the compendium of mixed categories there are six roots: (1)greed, (2) hatred, (3) delusion, (4) non-greed, (5) non-hatred, (6) non-delusion.
|
Guide to §15
The compendium of mixed categories is so called because it presents
classificatory schemes which include wholesome, unwholesome, and
morally indeterminate factors together. On the roots, see III, §5.
`272
§16 Jhana Factors
|7.16
The seven jhana factors: (1) initial application, (2) sustained application,  (3) zest, (4) one-pointedness, (5) joy, (6) displeasure, (7) equanimity.
|
Guide to §16
The word jhana is not used here in the usual sense of meditative
absorption, but in the broader sense of close contemplation (upanij-
jhayana) of an object. Therefore the states listed here are considered jhana
factors even when they occur outside a meditative framework. These
seven cetasikas are called jhana factors because they enable the mind to
closely contemplate its object. Of them, displeasure is exclusively un-
wholesome and occurs only in the two cittas connected with aversion.
The other six can be wholesome, unwholesome, or indeterminate, de-
pending on the citta in which they occur.
§17 Path Factors
|7.17
Twelve path factors: (1) right view, (2) right intention, (3) right speech, (4) right action, (5) right livelihood, (6) right effort, (7) right mindfulness, (8) right concentration, (9) wrong view, (10) wrong intention, (11) wrong effort, (12) wrong concentration.
|
Guide to §17
Here the word “path” is used in the sense of that which leads to a
particular destination, that is, towards the blissful states of existence, the
woeful states, and Nibbana. Of the twelve factors, the first eight lead to
the blissful states and Nibbana, the last four lead to the woeful states.
These twelve path factors can be reduced to nine cetasikas. Right view
is the cetasika of wisdom. Right intention, right effort, right mindful-
ness and right concentration are, respectively, the cetasikas of initial ap-
plication, energy, mindfulness, and one-pointedness found in the wholesome
and indeterminate cittas with roots. Right speech, right action, and right
`273
livelihood are the three abstinences (wirati) found collectively in the
supramundane cittas and separately on particular occasions in mundane
wholesome cittas.
Of the four wrong path factors, wrong view is the cetasika of views, 
and is the only exclusively unwholesome cetasika among the path fac-
tors. The other three factors are, in order, the cetasikas of initial appli-
cation, energy, and one-pointedness in the unwholesome cittas. There
are no distinct path factors of wrong speech, wrong action, and wrong
livelihood, since these are simply unwholesome modes of conduct moti-
vated by defilements. There is no factor of wrong mindfulness, since
mindfulness is an exclusively beautiful cetasika absent in the unwhole-
some cittas.
§18 Faculties
|7.18
Twenty-two faculties: (1) the eye faculty, (2) the ear faculty, (3) the nose faculty, (4) the tongue faculty, (5) the body faculty, (6) the femininity faculty, (7) the masculinity faculty, (8) the life
faculty, (9) the mind faculty, (10) the pleasure faculty, （11) the pain faculty, (12) the joy faculty, (13) the displeasure faculty, (14) the equanimity faculty, (15) the faith faculty, (16) the energy faculty, (17) the mindfulness faculty, (18) the concentration faculty, (19)the wisdom faculty, (20) the faculty, “I will know the unknown, ” (21) the faculty of final knowledge, (22) the faculty of one who has final knowledge.
|
Guide to §18
The faculties are phenomena which exercise control in their respec-
tive domains over their associated states. The first five faculties are iden-
tified with the five physical sensitivities; the two sexual faculties (6-7)
with the two material phenomena of sex; the life faculty (8) is twofold,
as the mental life faculty and the physical life faculty. The mind faculty
(9) is consciousness (citta) in its entirety, that is, all eighty-nine cittas.
The five faculties of feeling were discussed above (III, §2). The five
`274
spiritual faculties (15-19) reappear below at §27, and the last three fac-
ulties are explained at §22.
§19 Powers
|7.19
Nine powers: (1) the power of faith, (2) the power of energy, (3) the power of mindfulness, (4) the power of concentration, (5) the power of wisdom, (6) the power of shame, (7) the power of fear of wrongdoing, (8) the power of shamelessness, (9) the power of fearlessness of wrongdoing.
|
Guide to §19
These nine powers are so called because they cannot be shaken by their opposites and because they strengthen their adjuncts. Powers (1), (3), （5), （6), and (7) may be either wholesome or indeterminate; (8) and
(9) are exclusively unwholesome; (2) and (4) are of all three qualities.
§20 Predominants
|7.20
Four predominants: (1) predominance of desire, (2) predominance of energy, (3) predominance of consciousness, (4) predominance of investigation.
|
Guide to §20
The predominants are factors which dominate their conascent states
in undertaking and accomplishing difficult or important tasks. The dif-
ference between the predominants and the faculties lies in the degree
and range of their control. A predominant exercises supreme control over
the entire citta, while a faculty exercises control only in its respective
sphere. Thus, whereas several faculties can be present in a single citta,
only one predominant can be present at any given time. In this respect
a predominant is compared to a king who, as the sole head of state, lords
over all his ministers, while the faculties are compared to the ministers
who can govern their own districts but cannot interfere with the others.
`275
The four predominants are the cetasika desire (that is, desire-to-act,
which should not be confused with lobha, desire as greed), the cetasika
energy, citta, and the cetasika wisdom, here called investigation. Desire,
energy, and citta become predominants only in fifty-two javana cittas,
the two rooted in delusion and the Arahant, s smiling consciousness be-
ing the exceptions; investigation becomes a predominant only in the
thirty-four three-rooted javana cittas. Only one state can be a predomi-
nant at a time, and then only when it dominates the conascent states.
The predominant investigation may be wholesome or indeterminate; the
other predominants are of all three ethical qualities.
§21 Nutriments
|7.21
Four nutriments: (1) edible food, (2) contact as the second, (3) mental volition as the third, (4) consciousness as the fourth.
|
Guide to §21
The word nutriment (ahara) means that which sustains by acting as
a strong supporting condition. According to the Suttanta method of ex-
The four predominants are the cetasika desire (that is, desire-to-act,
which should not be confused with lobha, desire as greed), the cetasika
energy, citta, and the cetasika wisdom, here called investigation. Desire,
energy, and citta become predominants only in fifty-two javana cittas,
the two rooted in delusion and the Arahant, s smiling consciousness be-
ing the exceptions; investigation becomes a predominant only in the
thirty-four three-rooted javana cittas. Only one state can be a predomi-
nant at a time, and then only when it dominates the conascent states.
The predominant investigation may be wholesome or indeterminate; the
other predominants are of all three ethical qualities.
`276

§21 Clarifications
|7.22
Herein, among the faculties it is explained that the faculty “I will know the unknown” is the is the knowledge of the path of stream-entry; 
|7.23
the faculty of one who has final knowledge is the knowledge of the fruit of Arahantship;
|7.24
the faculty of final knowledge is the six intermediate kinds of (supramundane) knowledge.
|7.25
The life faculty is two-fold—physical and mental.
|7.26
The jhana factors are not found in the fivefold sense consciousness, the powers in those (kinds of consciousness) that are without energy, or the path factors in those that are rootless.
|7.27
So too, in the consciousness accompanied by doubt, one-pointedness does not attain to the stature of a path factor, a faculty, or a power.
|7.28
Only one predominant is obtained at a time, according to circumstances, and only in javanas with two roots or three roots.
|
Guide to §22
The five types of sense consciousness are merely simple confronta-
tions with their respective objects. Because their function and physical
base are weak, and they occupy an elementary place in the cognitive
process, thev cannot engage in a close contemplation of the object, and
stature of jhana factors. Moreover, initial application {vitakka) is the
foundation of the jhana factors, and in the five types of sense conscious-
ness initial application is absent, not because it has been transcended
(as in the higher jhanas) but because they are too primitive in function
to include it
Similarly, energy is required in a citta for its constituents to acquire
the stature of powers (bala). Therefore, in the sixteen cittas devoid of
energy, the mental factor of one-pointedness cannot fulfill the function
of the power of concentration.
The cittas devoid of roots cannot serve as a path leading to a par-
ticular destination; thus the path factors are not found in the eighteen
rootless cittas.
In the consciousness accompanied by doubt, one-pointedness lacks
reinforcement by decision (adhimokkha) and is overrun by doubt, with
its vacillating nature; thus it cannot attain the status of a path factor,
faculty, or power.
The predominants can occur only one at a time, for it is inherent
in the nature of predominance that only one state can function as a
`277
TABLE 7.2: MIXED CATEGORIES
	Unwholesome Only	Wholesome Only	Indeterminate Only	Wholesome & Indeterminate	All Three Qualities
Roots 6	Greed, hate, delusion			Non-greed, non-hate, non-delusion	
Jhana factors 7	Displeasure				In. appl., sus. appl” zest, one-ptns., joy, eqn.
Path factors 12	4 wrong factors			8 right factors	
Faculties 22	Displeasure	“I will know the unknown”	5 senses, 2 sexes, mat. life, pleasure, pain, one w. final knwl.	Faith, mindfulness, wisdom, final knwl.	Mental life, mind, joy, eqn., energy, concentration
Powers 9	Shamelessness, fearlessness			Faith, mindfulness, wisdom, shame, fear	Energy, con- centration
Predominants 4				Investigation	Desire, energy, consciousness
`278
predominant in any given citta, and then only in javanas with two or
three roots “according to circumstances, ” that is, when one of the four
predominant factors is exercising the role of predominance.
§23 Summary
|7.29
By way of entity, six roots, five jhana factors, nine path factors, sixteen faculties, and nine powers have been described.
Likewise, four predominants have been stated and four nutriments.
Thus the compendium of mixed categories, consisting of a combination of wholesome states and the rest, has been stated in seven ways.
|
Guide to §23
By way of entity, the jhana factors are fivefold because joy, displeas-
ure, and equanimity are all feelings, and feeling is a single cetasika. The
reduction of the path factors to nine has been explained above. The fac-
ulties become sixteenfold because faculties (10)-(14) are all represented
by one cetasika, feeling, while faculties (19)-(22) are all aspects of the
cetasika wisdom; the life faculty becomes two entities—one material
counted among the twenty-eight kinds of material phenomena, the other
mental counted among the fifty-two cetasikas.
The distribution of the mixed categories among the various ethical
classes is shown in Table 7.2.
Compendium of Requisites of Enlightenment
{bodhipakkhiyasangaha)
§24 Four Foundations of Mindfulness
|7.30
In the compendium of requisites of enlightenment, there are four foundations of mindfulness: (1) the foundation of mindfulness in contemplation of the body; (2) the foundation of mindfulness in contemplation of feelings; (3) the foundation of mindfulness in contemplation of consciousness; (4) the foundation of mindfulness in contemplation of mental objects.
|
`279
Guide to §24
Requisites of enlightenment: The Pali expression bodhipakkhiya-
dhammci means literally “states on the side of enlightenment.” Although
the expression appears rarely in the Suttas, in later literature it comes to
be used as a general term for the thirty-seven factors into which the
Buddha compressed the practice of his teaching (see D.16/ii,120, M.77/
ii, l 1-12). These factors are called “requisites of enlightenment” because
they conduce to the attainment of enlightenment, which is the knowl-
edge of the four supramundane paths. The thirty-seven requisites, as
shown, fall into seven groups.2
Four foundations of mindfulness (satipatthana): The word patthana
here is taken to have the dual meanings of “setting up” (or “applica-
tion” =upatthana) and “foundations, ” that is, of sati or mindfulness.
The four foundations of mindfulness form a complete system of medi-
tative practice for the development of mindfulness and insight. The
method is expounded at length in two suttas, D.22 and M.10, and in a
collection of short suttas, the Satipatthana Samyutta (S.47).3
The four foundations of mindfulness have a single essence, which
consists of mindful contemplation of phenomena. They are differentiated
insofar as this mindful contemplation is to be applied to four objects—
the body, feelings, states of consciousness, and mental objects. The latter
comprises such factors as the five hindrances, the five aggregates, the
six sense bases, the seven enlightenment factors, and the Four Noble
Truths. The practice of the four foundations of mindfulness is identical
with right mindfulness as the seventh factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.
§25 Four Supreme Efforts
|7.31
There are four supreme efforts: (1) the effort to discard evil states that have arisen, (2) the effort to prevent the arising of unarisen evil states, (3) the effort to develop unarisen wholesome states, (4) the effort to augment arisen wholesome states.
|
`280
Guide to §25
Four supreme efforts {sammappadhana): Here one mental factor,
energy, performs four separate functions. This fourfold effort is identi-
cal with right effort, the sixth factor of the Noble Eightfold Path.
§26 Four Means to Accomplishment
|7.32
There are four means to accomplishment: the means to accomplishment consisting of (1) desire, (2) energy, (3) consciousness, (4) investigation.
|
Guide to §26
Four means to accomplishment (iddhipada): The word iddhi here
signifies all sublime and supramundane states to be accomplished by
applying effort to the practice of the Buddha’s teaching. The principal
methods of achieving these are called the means of accomplishment.
These are identical with the four predominants (see §20). However, while
those states become predominants (adhipati) on any occasion when they
are instrumental in accomplishing a goal, they become iddhincidas only
when they are applied to achieving the goal of the Buddha’s teaching.
The expression iddhipcida extends to both mundane and supramundane
states.4
§27 Five Faculties
|7.33
There are five faculties: the faculties of (1) faith, (2) energy, (3) mindfulness, (4) concentration, (5) wisdom.
|
§28 Five Powers
|7.34
There are five powers: the powers of (1) faith, (2) energy, (3) mindfulness, (4) concentration, (5) wisdom.
|
`281
Guide to §§27-28
The faculties and powers comprise the same five factors, though dif-
ferent functions are attached to the two categories. The faculties are fac-
tors which exercise control in their respective domains, while the powers
are these same factors considered as being unshakable by their oppo-
sites. Thus the five faculties exercise control in the respective spheres
of resolution {adhimokkha), exertion (paggaha), awareness (upatthana),
non-distraction (avikkhepa), and discernment (dassana); in doing so they
help to overcome their opposites—indecision, laziness, negligence, agi-
tation, and delusion. The five powers are these same states considered
as unwavering and as incapable of being overcome by their opposites.
In the development of the faculties, faith and wisdom are to be balanced
to avoid the extremes of blind credulity and intellectual cleverness; en-
ergy and concentration are to be balanced to avoid restless agitation and
sluggish immobility of mind. But strong mindfulness is always neces-
sary, for mindfulness oversees the development of the other faculties and
ensures that they are kept in balance.
§29 Seven Factors of Enlightenment
|7.35
There are seven factors of enlightenment: the enlightenment factors of (1) mindfulness, (2) investigation of states, (3) energy, (4) zest, (5) tranquillity, (6) concentration, (7) equanimity.
|
Guide to §29
Among the seven factors of enlightenment, investigation of states
(dhammavicaya) is a designation for wisdom (panna), insight into mental
and material phenomena as they really are. Tranquillity {passaddhi)
means tranquillity both of consciousness and of the mental body (see
II, §5). Equanimity (upekkha) here means mental neutrality (tatra-
majjhattata), one of the universal beautiful cetasikas, not neutral feel-
ing. The three factors of investigation, energy, and zest are opposed to
mental sluggishness; the three factors of tranquillity, concentration, and
equanimity counteract mental excitation. Mindfulness assures that the
two groups occur in balance, neither exceeding the other.
`282
§30 Eight Path Factors
|7.36
There are eight path factors: (1) right view, (2) right intention, (3) right speech, (4) right action, (5) right livelihood, (6) right effort, (7) right mindfulness, (8) right concentration.
|
Guide to §30
Of the eight factors of the Noble Eightfold Path, right view
(sammaditthi) is the cetasika of wisdom exercised in understanding the
Four Noble Truths. Right intention {sammcisankappa) is the cetasika of
initial application (vitakka) directed towards renunciation, good will, and
harmlessness. Path factors (3)-(5) are identical with the three abstinences
(see II, §6). Right effort is the same as the four supreme efforts (§25).
Right mindfulness is the same as the four foundations of mindfulness
(§24). Right concentration is defined in terms of the four jhanas of the
Suttanta system (see D. 22/ii,313).
§31 A Clarification
|7.37
Here, by the four foundations of mindfulness, right mindfulness alone is implied.
|7.38
Similarly, by the four supreme efforts, right effort is implied.
|
§32 By way of States
|7.39
The sevenfold compendium of the thirty-seven factors is composed of these fourteen states considered by way of their intrinsic nature:
desire, consciousness, equanimity, faith, tranquillity, zest, right view, intention, effort, the three abstinences, right mindfulness, and concentration.
|
`283
§33 By way of Occurrence
|7.40
The analysis of these thirty-seven excellent factors is as follows:
nine —intention, tranquillity, zest, equanimity, desire, consciousness, and the three abstinences—each occur only once; energy occurs nine times; mindfulness eight times; concentration four times; wisdom five times; and faith two times.
|7.41
All these occur in the supramundane, except at times intention and zest. In the mundane, too, they occur in the course of the sixfold purification, according to circumstances.
|
Guide to §§32-33
In §32 the thirty-seven requisites of enlightenment are reduced to four-
teen entities, one being citta, the other thirteen cetasikas. In §33 the oc-
currence of these entities among the requisites is tabulated by collating
synonyms. The results of this tabulation are seen in Table 7.3.
Energy occurs nine times as: four supreme efforts, means of accom-
plishment, faculty, power, enlightenment factor, and path factor.
Mindfulness occurs eight times as: four foundations of mindfulness,
faculty, power, enlightenment factor, and path factor.
Concentration occurs four times as: faculty, power, enlightenment
factor, and path factor.
Wisdom occurs five times as: means of accomplishment, faculty,
power, enlightenment factor, and path factor.
Faith occurs twice as a faculty and power. The remaining states oc-
cur only once.
Intention is not found in supramundane cittas occurring at the level
of the second jhana and above. This is because right intention
(sammasankappo) is the cetasika of vitakka or initial application, and
the supramundane paths and fruits conjoined with the second and higher
jhanas are free from vitakka. Similarly, zest (piti) is not found in
supramundane cittas occurring at the level of the fourth and fifth jhanas.
`285
The sixfold purification (chabbisuddhiY These are the six mundane
stages of purification preceding and culminating in the seventh,
supramundane, stage of purification (see IX, §22). These six stages are
an expanded version of the more common threefold division of the pre-
liminary path into virtue, concentration, and wisdom. The seventh stage
is the attainment of the supramundane paths. In the six mundane stages
of purification the thirty-seven requisites of enlightenment are found in
various combinations, according to circumstances.
Compendium of the Whole
{sabbasangaha)
§34 The Five Aggregates
|7.42
In the compendium of the whole, the five aggregates are: (1) the materiality aggregate, (2) the feeling aggregate, (3) the perception aggregate, (4) the mental formations aggregate, (5) the consciousness aggregate.
|
Guide to §34
The compendium of the whole: In this section the author’s purpose
is to collect those schemata of the Abhidhamma philosophy that incor-
porate the totality of concrete entities. These schemata are set forth, not
for the purpose of developing an abstract ontology, but to show the range
of phenomena that are to be comprehended with insight. This accords
with the Buddha’s statement: “Without directly knowing the whole,
without fully understanding the whole, one is incapable of destroying
suffering”（S.35:26/iv, 17).
The five aggregates: The word khandha is understood in the sense
of group, mass, or aggregate (rasi). The Buddha analyzes a living be-
ing into these five groups. In the Suttas he states: “Whatever kind of
materiality there is, whether past, future or present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—this is called the
materiality aggregate.” The same method is applied to the other four
aggregates (S.22:48/iii,47). The relationship between the five aggregates
and the four ultimate realities has been explained above (see I, §2).
`286
§35 The Five Aggregates of Clinging
|7.43
The five aggregates of clinging are: (1) the materiality aggregate of clinging, (2) the feeling aggregate of clinging, (3) the perception aggregate of clinging, (4) the mental formations aggregate of clinging, (5) the consciousness aggregate of clinging.
|
Guide to §35
The five aggregates of clinging: These are called upcidanakkhandha,
aggregates of clinging, because they constitute the objects of clinging.
The Buddha states: “Whatever kind of materiality there is, whether past,
future or present, etc., connected with taints and subject to clinging —
this is called the materiality aggregate of clinging.” Again, the same
method of definition applies to the other four aggregates (S.22:48/iii,48).
Here, all components of the five aggregates that enter into range of the
four types of clinging (see §7) are called aggregates of clinging. This
includes the entire aggregate of materiality and the four mental aggre-
gates of the mundane plane. The four mental aggregates of the supra-
mundane plane are not aggregates of clinging because they entirely
transcend the range of clinging; that is, they cannot become objects of
greed or wrong views.5
§36 The Twelve Sense Bases
|7.44
The twelve sense bases are: (1) the eye base, (2) the ear base, (3) the nose base, (4) the tongue base, (5) the body base, (6) the mind base, (7) the visible form base, (8) the sound base, (9) the smell base, (10) the taste base, (11) the tangible base, (12) the mental-object base.
|
Guide to §36
The twelve sense bases offer another perspective on the whole. From
this perspective the totality of concrete entities is viewed by way of the
`287
doors and objects of consciousness. Bases (1 )-(5) are identical with the
five kinds of sensitive material phenomena and bases (7)-( 11) with the
five kinds of objective material phenomena. The mind base (6), how-
ever, has a wider range than the mind door. It is identified with the aggre-
gate of consciousness in its totality, comprising all eighty-nine types of
citta. The mental-object base does not completely coincide with mental
object (dhammarammana), but includes only those entities not found
among the other bases. Thus it excludes the first five objective bases,
the five types of sensitive matter, and citta, which is identical with the
mind base. It also excludes concepts {pafinatti), since the notion of base
(ayatana) extends only to ultimate realities, i.e. things existing by way
of intrinsic nature {sabhava), and does not extend to things that owe their
existence to conceptual construction. The mental-object base comprises
the fifty-two mental factors, the sixteen kinds of subtle matter, and
Nibbana (see §39 below).6
§37 The Eighteen Elements
|7.45
The eighteen elements are: (1) the eye element, (2) the ear element, (3) the nose element, (4) the tongue element, (5) the body element, (6) the visible form element, (7) the sound element, (8) the smell element, (9) the taste element, (10) the tangible element, (11) the eye-consciousness element, (12) the ear-consciousness element, (13) the nose-consciousness element, (14) the tongue-consciousness element, (15) the body-consciousness element, (16) the mind element, (17) the
mental-object element, (18) the mind-consciousness element.
|
Guide to §37
The elements are called dhatu because they bear {dharenti) their own
intrinsic natures. The eighteen elements are obtained from the twelve
bases by dividing the mind base into the seven elements of conscious-
ness (see III, §21). In all other respects the bases and the elements are
identical. For a correlation of the aggregates, bases, and elements with
the four ultimate realities, see Table 7.4.
`289
§38 The Four Noble Truths
|7.46
The Four Noble Truths are: (1) the noble truth of suffering, (2) the noble truth of the origin of suffering, (3) the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and (4) the noble truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering.
|
Guide to §38
The Four Noble Truths are the fundamental teaching of the Bud-
dha, discovered by him on the night of his Enlightenment and expounded
by him repeatedly during his long ministry. These four truths are called
noble (ariya) because they are penetrated by the noble ones; because
they are the truths taught by the supreme Noble One, the Buddha; be-
cause their discovery leads to the state of a noble one; and because they
are the real, unalterable, undeceptive truths about existence.
The noble truth of suffering is expounded as twelvefold: the suf-
fering of birth, aging, death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, despair,
association with the unpleasant, separation from the pleasant, not to get
what one wants, and the five aggregates of clinging. Concisely, the noble
truth of suffering comprises all phenomena of the three mundane planes
of existence except craving.
The noble truth of the origin of suffering is a single factor, namely,
craving (tanha), which is identical with the cetasika of greed (lobha).
Craving, however, has three aspects: craving for sense pleasures (kama-
tanha), craving for continued existence (bhavatanha), and craving for
annihilation (vibhavatanha).
The noble truth of the cessation of suffering is also singlefold: it
is Nibbana, which is to be realized by the eradication of craving.
The noble truth of the way to the cessation of suffering is the Noble
Eightfold Path. In the teaching of the four truths, this is the collection
of eight cetasikas corresponding to the eight path factors arisen in the
cittas of the four supramundane paths. It should be noted that while in
the section on the requisites of enlightenment, the eight path factors may
be either mundane or supramundane, in the teaching of the Four Noble
Truths they are exclusively supramundane.7
`290
§39 A Clarification
|7.47
Herein, sixty-nine states comprising (fifty-two) mental factors, (sixteen kinds of) subtle matter, and Nibbana, are regarded as the mental-object base and the mental-object element.
|7.48
The mind base itself is divided into the seven elements of consciousness.
|
§40 Summary
|7.49
Matter, feeling, perception, the remaining mental factors, and consciousness—these five are called the five aggregates.
|7.50
The same states that pertain to the three (mundane) planes are regarded as the five aggregates of clinging.
As Nibbana lacks differentiation (such as past, present, future), it is excluded from the category of aggregates.
|7.51
Owing to the difference between doors and objects, there are (twelve) sense bases. In accordance with doors, objects, and their corresponding consciousness, arise the (eighteen) elements.
|7.52
The round of existence in the three planes is suffering. Craving is its origin. Cessation is Nibbana.
|7.53
The path is regarded as supramundane.
Mental states associated with the paths and the fruits are excluded from the four truths.
Thus the compendium of the whole has been explained in five ways.
Thus ends the seventh chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Categories.
|
`291
Guide to §40
Mental states associated with the paths: Apart from the eight cetasikas corresponding to the eight path factors, the other constituents of the supramundane path consciousness—the citta itself and the associated cetasikas —are not strictly speaking part of the eightfold path, and thus are not comprehended by the Four Noble Truths. The four fruits as well are excluded from the framework of the Four Noble Truths.

`292
COMPENDIUM OF CONDITIONALITY
(Paccayasangahavibhaga)
§1 Introductory Verse
|8.1
I shall now explain here, in a fitting manner, the detailed analysis of the conditioned states, and of those states which are their conditions, and of how (they are related).
|
Guide to §1
I shall now explain here: Having thus far explained the four types
of ultimate realities and their categories, Acariya Anuruddha now pro-
ceeds to explain, in this compendium of conditionality, the analysis of
their relations as conditioning states (paccayadhamma) and condition-
ally arisen states (paccayuppannadhamma), linked by the conditioning
forces {paccayasatti).
Of the conditioned states {yesam sankhatadhammanam): Condi-
tioned states are phenomena {dhammci) that arise in dependence on con-
ditions, that is, all cittas, cetasikas, and material phenomena (except the
four material characteristics —see VI, §15).
Those states which are their conditions {ye dhamma paccaya): A
condition is a state which is efficacious (upakaraka) in the arising or
persistence of other states. This means that a condition, when operative, 
will cause other states connected to it to arise if they have not already
arisen, or, if they have arisen, will maintain them in existence. All con-
ditioned phenomena, as well as Nibbana and concepts, are included in
the category of conditioning states.
And of how (they are related) (yatha): This refers to the twenty-
four kinds of conditioning forces that operate between the conditioning
states and the conditioned states. These too will be analyzed.
`293
§2 In Brief: The Two Methods
|8.2
The compendium of conditionality is twofold:
(1) the method of dependent arising; and
(2) the method of conditional relations.
|8.3
Of these, the method of dependent arising is marked by the simple happening of a state in dependence on some other state. The method of conditional relations is discussed with reference to the specific causal efficacy of the conditions. Teachers explain them by mixing both methods.
|
Guide to §2
The method of dependent arising: The term “dependent arising” is
a compound of paticca, dependent on, and samuppada, arising, origi-
nation. The expression is generally applied to the twelve-term formula
expounded in §3, commonly met with in the Suttas.
Abstractly stated, the principle of dependent arising is expressed by
the oft-occurring dictum: “When this exists, that comes to be; with the
arising of this, that arises” (imasmim sati idam hoti, imass ’ uppada idam
uppajjati). In the present text this same principle of dependent arising
is characterized as “the simple happening of a state in dependence on
some other state” (tabbhavabhavJbhavakciramatta). Here tabbhava,
“some other state,” refers to the occurrence of the condition; bhavJ means
the conditioned state; and bhavakciramatta, “the simple happening,”
means the mere occurrence of the conditioned state.
As applied to the twelve terms of the Sutta formula, this principle
means that when any of the conditions, such as ignorance, etc., exist,
then in dependence on those conditions the conditionally arisen states,
such as kammic formations, etc., come to be.
The method of conditional relations: This is the method set forth
in the Patthana, the Book of Conditional Relations, the seventh and last
part of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. In contrast to the method of dependent
arising, which deals only with the conditioning states and conditioned
states and the structure of their arising, the method of the Patthana also
deals with the conditioning forces {paccayasatti). A force (satti) is that
`294
which has the power to bring about or accomplish an effect. Just as the
hotness of chillis is inherent in the chillis and cannot exist without them,
so too the conditioning forces are inherent in the conditioning states and
cannot exist without them. All conditioning states have their particular
force, and this force enables them to cause the arising of the conditioned
states.
The specific causal efficacy of the conditions: This is a free ren-
dering of the cryptic Pali expression ahacca paccayatthiti. Ledi Sayadaw
explains the phrase to mean “the special force of the conditions, that is, 
their efficacy in various ways,” and he states that unlike the method of
dependent arising, where the mere conditioning state is exhibited, the
method of conditional relations is taught in full by exhibiting the spe-
cial force of the conditions.
Teachers explain them by mixing both methods: A mixed treat-
ment of the methods is found in the Visuddhimagga, Chapter XVII, where
the twenty-four conditional relations are used to elucidate the relation-
ship between each pair of factors in the twelvefold formula of depend-
ent arising.
The Method of Dependent Arising
[paticcasamuppadanaya)
§3 The Basic Formula
|8.4
(1) Dependent on ignorance arise kammic formations.
(2) Dependent on kammic formations arises consciousness.
(3) Dependent on consciousness arises mind-and-matter.
(4) Dependent on mind-and-matter arise the six sense bases.
(5) Dependent on the six sense bases arises contact.
(7) Dependent on contact arises feeling.
(2) Dependent on feeling arises craving.
(8) Dependent on craving arises clinging.
(9) Dependent on clinging arises existence.
(10) Dependent on existence arises birth.
(11) Dependent on birth arise decay-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair.
Thus arises this whole mass of suffering.
Herein, this is the method of dependent arising.
|
Guide to §3
The method of dependent arising: Dependent arising is essentially
an account of the causal structure of the round of existence (vatta), dis-
closing the conditions that sustain the wheel of birth and death and make
it revolve from one existence to another. In the Commentaries depend-
ent arising is defined as the arising of effects evenly in dependence on
a conjunction of conditions (paccaya-samaggim pat icc a samam
phalanam uppado). This implies that no single cause can produce an
effect, nor does only one effect arise from a given cause. Rather, there
is always a collection of conditions giving rise to a collection of effects.
When, in the familiar formula, one state is declared to be the condition
for another, this is said in order to single out the chief condition among
a collection of conditions and relate it to the most important effect among
a collection of effects.1
(1) Dependent on ignorance arise the kammic formations: Igno-
rance (avijja) is the cetasika delusion, which obscures perception of the
true nature of things just as a cataract obscures perception of visible
objects. According to the Suttanta method of explanation, ignorance is
non-knowledge of the Four Noble Truths. According to the Abhidhamma
method, ignorance is non-knowledge of eight things: the Four Noble
Truths, the pre-natal past, the post-mortem future, the past and the future
together, and dependent arising.
Kammic formations (sankhara) are the twenty-nine volitions associ-
ated with mundane wholesome and unwholesome cittas. The volitions
in the eight great wholesome cittas and in the five wholesome fine-ma-
terial jhana cittas are collectively called meritorious volitional forma-
tions (punnabhisankhara). The volitions in the twelve unwholesome
cittas are called demeritorious volitional formations (apunncibhisan-
khcird). And the volitions in the four wholesome immaterial jhana cittas
are called imperturbable volitional formations {anenjabhisankhara).
When the mental continuum of a living being is imbued with igno-
rance, then his volitional activity generates kamma with the potency
to produce results in the future. Hence ignorance is called the chief
`296
condition for kammic formations. Ignorance is predominant in unwhole-
some activities, while it is latent in mundane wholesome activities. Hence
both mundane wholesome and unwholesome kammic formations are said
to be conditioned by ignorance.
(2)	Dependent on kammic formations arises consciousness: That
is, the kammic formations—the twenty-nine wholesome and unwhole-
some volitions—condition the arising of the thirty-two kinds of resultant
consciousness. At the moment of conception one especially potent
kammic formation accumulated in the mental continuum of the deceased
being generates one of the nineteen types of rebirth consciousness in
the realm appropriate for that kamma to mature. Thereafter, during the
course of existence, other accumulated kammas generate other result-
ant types of consciousness according to circumstances, as explained at
V, §§27-33.
(3)	Dependent on consciousness arises mind-and-matter: Whereas
in step (2) vifinana refers exclusively to resultant consciousness, here it
signifies both resultant consciousness and the kammic consciousness of
previous lives. The term “mind” (nama) denotes the cetasikas associ-
ated with resultant consciousness, the term “matter” (rupa) denotes ma-
terial phenomena produced by kamma. In five-constituent existence
(pancavokarabhava)—that is, those realms where all five aggregates are
found—consciousness conditions both mind and matter together. But in
four-constituent existence (catuvokarabhava), the immaterial realms, it
conditions mind alone. And m one-constituent existence
{ekavokarabhava), the realm of non-percipient beings, it conditions
matter alone. In the event of a five-constituent rebirth, when the rebirth
consciousness arises at the moment of rebirth-linking there arise simul-
taneously the other three mental aggregates of feeling, perception, and
mental formations, along with a particular conglomeration of material
phenomena—in the case of human beings, the material decads of the
body, sex, and the heart-base. Because consciousness is the chief of these
coexistent mental and material elements, it is said that consciousness
conditions mind-and-matter.
(4) Dependent on mind-and-matter arise the six sense bases: Here,
“mind-and-matter” has the same denotation as in step (3). Of the six sense
bases, the first five bases are the sensitive matter of the eye, ear, nose,
tongue, and body, while the mind base denotes the thirty-two kinds of
resultant consciousness. When the kamma-born material phenomena
arise, they condition the arising of the five sense organs, which are also
types of kamma-born matter. When the associated cetasikas arise, they
condition the arising of the resultant consciousness, here called the mind
base. In other words, the resultant consciousness conditions mind (ncima),
`297
and mind conditions the resultant consciousness: they relate to each other
as mutuality condition (annamanirapaccaya). In the sensuous plane mind-
and-matter conditions the arising of all six sense bases; in the fine-
material plane only three bases arise—the eye, ear, and mind bases; in
the immaterial plane mind alone conditions the arising of the mind base
alone, the only sense base in that plane as the five material sense bases
are necessarily absent.
(5)	Dependent on the six sense bases arises contact: Contact
(phassa) here denotes the contact associated with resultant conscious-
ness. Contact is the “coming together” (sangati) of consciousness and
the mental factors with an object at one or another of the six sense bases.
The contact which arises at the sensitive eye base is called eye-contact.
It marks the coming together of the eye, a visible form, and eye-con-
sciousness. The other kinds of contact—ear-contact, etc.—likewise arise
in dependence on their respective sense bases. Mind-contact is the con-
tact associated with the twenty-two kinds of resultant consciousness, ex-
cluding the two sets of fivefold sense consciousness. As contact can occur
only when the sense bases exist, it is said that contact is dependent on
the six sense bases.
(6)	Dependent on contact arises feeling: Whenever contact occurs,
feeling (vedana) arises simultaneously, conditioned by that same con-
tact. Contact is the encounter of consciousness with the object, and that
encounter is necessarily accompanied by a particular affective tone, the
feeling produced by the contact. There are six classes of feeling: feel-
ing born of eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, etc., to feeling born
of mind-contact. In terms of its affective quality, feeling may be pleas-
ant, painful, or neutral, according to the base and object.
(7) Dependent on feeling arises craving: Feeling conditions the aris-
ing of craving (tanha). There are six kinds of craving: craving for forms,
for sounds, for smells, for tastes, for tangibles, and for mental objects.
Each of these again becomes threefold according to whether it is sim-
ply craving for sensual pleasure; or craving for existence, i.e. craving
conjoined with an eternalist view (sassataditthi); or craving for annihil-
ation, i.e. craving conjoined with an annihilationist view (ucchedaditthi).
In all its varieties, craving is ultimately reducible to the cetasika greed
(lobha). See VII, §38.
Although craving is distinguished by way of its object, the craving
itself actually depends on the feeling that arises through contact with
that object. If one experiences a pleasant feeling, one relishes that pleasant
feeling and desires the object only insofar as it arouses the pleasant feel-
ing. On the other hand, when one experiences a painful feeling, one has
a craving to be free from the pain and one longs for a pleasurable feeling
`298
to replace it. Neutral feeling has a peaceful nature, and this too becomes
an object of craving. Thus the three kinds of feeling condition the aris-
ing of various types of craving.
(8)	Dependent on craving arises clinging: Here clinging (upadcina)
is of the four kinds explained above (VII, §7). Clinging to sense pleas-
ures is intensified craving, a mode of the cetasika greed; the other three
kinds of clinging are modes of the cetasika wrong view. Each of these
types of clinging is conditioned by craving. In the first case, weak or
initial greed for an object is called craving, while the intensified greed
is called clinging. In the other three cases, the greed that conditions wrong
views is called craving, while the views that are accepted under the in-
fluence of that greed are called clinging.
(9)	Dependent on clinging arises existence: There are two kinds of
existence—the kammically active process of existence (kammabhava)
and the passive or resultant process of existence (upapattibhava). Ac-
tive existence denotes the twenty-nine types of wholesome and unwhole-
some volition, or all wholesome and unwholesome kamma that leads to
new existence. Resultant existence denotes the thirty-two kinds of re-
sultant cittas, their associated cetasikas, and material phenomena born
of kamma.
Clinging is a condition for active existence because, under the influ-
ence of clinging, one engages in action that is accumulated as kamma.
Clinging is a condition Tor resultant existence because that same cling-
ing leads one back into the round of rebirth in a state determined by
one’s kamma.
(10)	Dependent on existence arises birth: Here birth (jati) means
the arising of the mundane resultant cittas, their cetasikas, and kamma-
born matter in a new life in one or another realm of existence. The
essential condition for the occurrence of a future birth lies in whole-
some and unwholesome kamma, that is, in present kammically active
existence.
(11)	Dependent on birth arise decay-and-death, etc.: Once birth
has occurred, there inevitably follow decay-and-death and all the other
kinds of suffering between birth and death, such as sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair. All of this suffering is rooted in birth, thus birth
is singled out as their principal condition.
Thus arises the whole mass of suffering: The whole mass of suf-
fering mentioned in step (11) arises through the concatenation of inter-
dependent conditioning and conditioned states described in the formula.
`299
§4 Categories of Analysis
|8.5
It should be understood that there are three periods, twelve factors, twenty modes, three connections, four groups, three rounds, and two roots.
|
§5 The Three Periods
|8.6
How? Ignorance and kammic formations belong to the past; birth and decay-and-death belong to the future; the intermediate eight factors belong to the present. Thus there are three periods.
|
Guide to §5
When the twelve factors are divided into three periods of time, this
should be seen as a mere expository device for exhibiting the causal
structure of the round of existence. It should not be taken to imply that
the factors assigned to a particular temporal period operate only in that
period and not on other occasions. In fact, the twelve factors are always
present together in any single life, mutually implicative and interpene-
trating, as §7 below will demonstrate.
§6 The Twelve Factors
`300
|8.7
(1) Ignorance, (2) kammic formations, (3) consciousness, (4) mind-and-matter, (5) the six sense bases, (6) contact, (7) feeling, (8) craving, (9) clinging, (10) existence, (11) birth, (12) decay-and-death are the twelve factors. 
|8.8
The terms sorrow and so on are shown as incidental consequences (of birth).
§7 The Four Groups
|8.9
Here, by taking ignorance and kammic formations, craving, clinging, and existence are also taken. Likewise, by taking craving, clinging, and existence, ignorance and kammic formations are also taken.
By taking birth and decay-and-death, the five effects—consciousness and so on—are also taken.
Thus there are:
|8.10
(1) Five causes pertaining to the past,
(2) And five effects to the present;
(3) Five causes pertaining to the present, 
(4) And five effects to the future.
There are twenty modes, three connections, and four groups.
|
Guide to §7
When ignorance remains unabandoned in the mind, then craving and
clinging are bound to arise; and whenever craving and clinging occur,
they are rooted in and accompanied by ignorance. Further, the terms
“kammic formations” and “existence” both refer to the same reality —
kammically active volition. Therefore, when one set of terms is men-
tioned, the other is implied, and when the other is mentioned, the former
is implied. Birth and decay-and-death are not enumerated separately
among the twenty modes because they are characteristics of mind and
matter, not ultimate realities. The ultimates which they qualify are the
five factors from consciousness through feeling (3-7).
The three connections obtain between past causes and present results
(2-3), between present results and present causes (7-8), and between
present causes and future results (10-11). The classifications proposed
in this passage are shown schematically in Table 8.1.
`301
§8 The Three Rounds
|8.11
The three rounds :
(1) Ignorance, craving, and clinging belong to the round of defilements.
(2) One part of existence known as kammic existence and kammic formations belong to the round of kamma.
(3) One part of existence known as rebirth existence and the rest belong to the round of results.
|
Guide to §8
The three rounds exhibit the cyclic pattern of existence in samsara.
The most fundamental round is the round of defilements. Blinded by
ignorance and driven by craving, a person engages in various unwhole-
some and mundane wholesome activities. Thus the round of defilements
TABLE 8.1: DEPENDENT ARISING
3 Periods	12 Factors	20 Modes &
		4 Groups
Past	1. Ignorance	Past causes 5:
	2. Formations	1, 2, 8, 9, 10
			
	3. Consciousness		
	4. Mind - & - matter	Present effects 5:	
	5. Six sense bases	3-7	
	6. Contact		
Present	7. Feeling		
	8. Craving	Present causes 5:	
	9. Clinging	8, 9, 10, 1, 2	
	10. Existence		
Future	11. Birth	Future effects 5:	
	12. Decay - & - death	3-7	
Three Connections
1.	Past causes with present effects (between 2 & 3)
2.	Present effects with present causes (between 7 & 8)
3.	Present causes with future effects (between 10 & 11)
Three Rounds
1.	Round of defilements: 1, 8, 9
2.	Round of kamma: 2, 10 (part)
3.	Round of results: 3-7, 10 (part), 11, 12
Two Roots
1.	Ignorance: from past to present
2.	Craving: from present to future
`302
gives rise to the round of kamma. When this kamma matures it ripens
in the resultants, and thus the round of kamma gives rise to the round
of resultants. In response to these resultants —the pleasant and painful
fruits of his own actions—the person still immersed in ignorance is
overcome by craving to enjoy more pleasant experiences, clings to those
he already has, and tries to avoid the painful ones. Thus the round of
resultants generates another round of defilements. In this way the three-
fold round turns incessantly until the ignorance at its base is removed
by the wisdom of insight and the supramundane paths.
§9 The Two Roots
|8.12
Ignorance and craving should be understood as the two roots.
|
Guide to §9
Ignorance is called the root from the past extending into the present,
which reaches its culmination in feeling. Craving is called the root from
the present extending into the future, which reaches its culmination in
decay-and-death.
§10 Summary
|8.13
By the destruction of these roots the round ceases. With the arising of the taints in those who are constantly oppressed by infatuation with decay and death, ignorance again occurs.
The Great Sage has thus expounded this entangled, beginningless round of becoming with its three planes as “dependent arising.”
|
Guide to §10
In the Sammaditthi Sutta (M.9/i, 54-55) the Venerable Sariputta is
asked to explain the cause of ignorance and he replies that ignorance
arises from the taints {asavasamudaya avijjasamudayo). When he is
asked to state the cause of the taints, he replies that the taints arise from
ignorance {avijjasamudaya asavasamudayo). Since the most fundamental
`303
of the taints is the taint of ignorance (avijjasava), the Venerable
Sariputta’s statement implies that the ignorance in any given existence
arises from the ignorance in the preceding existence. This, in effect,
establishes the round of becoming as beginningless (anadikam) since any
instance of ignorance always depends on a preceding life in which ig-
norance was present, entailing an infinite regression. On the taints, see
VII, §3.
The Method of Conditional Relations
[patthananaya)
§11 The Twenty-four Conditions
|8.14
The following is the method of conditional relations: (1) root condition, (2) object condition, (3) predominance condition, (4) proximity condition, (5) contiguity condition, (6) conascence condition, (7) mutuality condition, (8) support condition, (9) decisive support condition, (10) prenascence condition, (11) postnascence condition, (12) repetition condition, (13) kamma condition, (14) result condition, (15) nutriment condition, (16) faculty condition, (17) jhana condition, (18) path condition, (19) association condition, (20) dissociation condition, (21) presence condition, (22) absence condition, (23) disappearance condition, (24) non-disappearance condition.
|
Guide to §11
The twenty-four conditions listed above form the subject matter of
the Patthana, which presents a detailed exposition of the various ways
in which they inter-relate the mental and material phenomena enumer-
ated in the Dhammasangan/, the first book of the Abhidhamma Pitaka.
In order to properly comprehend the Abhidhamma teaching on condi-
tional relations, it is essential to understand the three factors involved
`304
TABLE 8.2: THE TWENTY-FOUR CONDITIONS
AND THEIR VARIETIES
1.	Root condition
2.	Object condition
3.	Predominance condition
(1)	Object predominance
(2)	Conascence predominance
4.	Proximity condition
5.	Contiguity condition
6.	Conascence condition
7.	Mutuality condition
8.	Support condition
(1)	Conascence support
(2)	Prenascence support
(a)	Base-prenascence support
(b)	Base-object-prenascence support
9.	Decisive support condition
(1)	Object decisive support
(2)	Proximity decisive support
(3)	Natural decisive support
10. Prenascence condition
14.	Result condition
15.	Nutriment condition
(1)	Material nutriment
(2)	Mental nutriment
16.	Faculty condition
(1)	Prenascence faculty
(2)	Material life faculty
(3)	Conascence faculty
17.	Jhana condition
18.	Path condition
19.	Association condition
20.	Dissociation condition
(1)	Conascence dissociation
(2)	Prenascence dissociation
(3)	Postnascence dissociation
21.	Presence condition
(1)	Conascence presence
(2)	Prenascence presence
(3)	Postnascence presence
(4)	Nutriment presence
(5)	Faculty presence
	(1) Base prenascence		Absence condition
	(2) Object prenascence	23.	Disappearance condition
11.	Postnascence condition	24.	Non-disappearance condition
12.	Repetition condition		
13.	Kamma condition (1)	Conascent kamma (2)	Asynchronous kamma		
in any particular relation: (1) the conditioning states {paccayadhamma),
the phenomena that function as conditions for other phenomena either
by producing them, by supporting them, or by maintaining them; (2) the
conditionally arisen states {paccayuppannadhamma), the states condi-
tioned by the conditioning states, the phenomena that arise and persist
in being through the assistance provided by the conditioning states; and
(3) the conditioning force of the condition (paccayasatti), the particular
way in which the conditioning states function as conditions for the con-
ditioned states.
In the following sections (§§13-27) Acariya Anuruddha will explain
how the twenty-four conditions structure the relations betwen the
`305
different classes of phenomena. Instead of proceeding to explicate each
condition in the original order, he classifies the conditioning states and
the conditioned states as mind, matter, and mind-and-matter conjoined,
and then introduces the conditions pertinent to the relations between these
classes in their six permutations. In elaborating upon these sections we
will call attention to the three factors involved in each condition when
they are not immediately clear from the text.2 In Table 8.3 the condi-
tioning and conditioned states for each condition are listed following
the traditional order.
§12 Application in Brief
|8.15
In six ways mind is a condition for mind. In five ways mind is a condition for mind-and-matter. Again, mind is a condition in one way for matter, and matter in one way for mind. In two ways concepts and mind-and-matter are a condition for mind. In nine ways the dyad—mind-and-matter—is a condition for mind-and-matter. Thus the relations are sixfold. How?
§13 Mind for Mind
|8.16
In six ways mind is a condition for mind:
Consciousness and mental factors that immediately cease are a condition for present consciousness and mental factors by way of proximity, contiguity, absence and disappearance.
Preceding javanas are a condition for subsequent javanas by way of repetition.
Conascent consciousness and mental factors are a condition for one another by way of association.
|
`306
Guide to §13
Proximity condition (4), contiguity condition (5): These two con-
ditions are identical in meaning; they differ only in the letter, which
highlights the same relation from slightly different angles. Formally
defined, proximity condition is a condition where one mental state, the
conditioning state, causes another mental state, the conditioned state, to
arise immediately after it has ceased, so that no other mental state can
intervene between them. Contiguity condition is a condition where the
conditioning mental state causes the conditioned mental state to arise
immediately after it has ceased, in accordance with the fixed order of
the mental process. These two conditions apply to the relationship be-
tween the citta and cetasikas ceasing at any given moment and the citta
and cetasikas that arise in immediate succession. The citta and cetasikas
that have just ceased are the conditioning states; the citta and cetasikas
that arise immediately afterwards are the conditioned states. The death
consciousness of an Arahant, however, does not function as proximity
or contiguity condition, since it is not followed by any other citta.
Absence condition (22), disappearance condition (23): These two
conditions are another pair which are identical in substance but differ
merely in the letter. Absence condition is a condition where a mental
state in ceasing gives the opportunity to another mental state to arise
immediately next to itself. Disappearance condition is a condition where
a mental state, by its own disappearance, gives the opportunity to the
next mental state to arise. The conditioning and conditioned states in
these two relations are identical with those of the proximity and conti-
guity conditions.
Repetition condition (12) is a condition where the conditioning
mental state causes the conditioned states, mental phenomena similar to
itself, to arise with increased power and efficiency after it has ceased.
Just as a student, by repeated study, becomes more proficient in his les-
sons, so the conditioning states, by causing states similar to themselves
to arise in succession, impart greater proficiency and strength to them.
The conditioning states in this relation are solely mundane wholesome,
unwholesome, and functional mental phenomena at any given moment
in the javana process except the last javana, insofar as they serve as a
condition for mental phenomena having the same kammic quality (whole-
some, unwholesome, or functional) in the following javana moment. The
latter are the conditioned states in this relation.
Although the four supramundane path cittas are wholesome javanas,
they do not become the conditioning states of repetition condition be-
cause they are followed by fruition cittas, which are resultants, and thus
the repetition essential to this relation is lacking. And though fruition
`307
cittas can occur in succession in a javana process, because they are
resultants they do not meet the full definition of the conditioning states
in repetition condition. However, the triple-rooted sense-sphere whole-
some cittas which immediately precede the path cittas are conditioning
states and the latter are conditioned states in the repetition condition.
Association condition (19) is a condition where a mental state, the
conditioning state, causes other mental states, the conditioned states, to
arise and be associated in an inseparable group characterized by its
members having a common arising and cessation, a common object, and
a common physical base (see II, §1). This condition obtains between
any citta or cetasika as the conditioning state and all the other mental
phenomena in the same unit of consciousness as the conditioned states.
§14 Mind for Mind-and-Matter
|8.17
In five ways mind is a condition for mind-and-matter:
Roots, jhana factors, and path factors are a condition for conascent mind-and-matter by way of root, etc.
Conascent volition is a condition for conascent mind-and-matter, and asynchronous volition for mind-and-matter bom of kamma, by way of kamma.
The (mental) resultant aggregates are a condition for one another and for conascent matter by way of result.
|
Guide to §14
Root condition (1) is a condition where a conditioning state func-
tions like a root by imparting firmness and fixity to the conditioned states.
The conditioning states in this relation are the six mental factors known
as roots (see III, §5): the three unwholesome roots—greed, hatred, and
delusion; and the three beautiful roots —non-greed, non-hatred, and non-
delusion —which may be either wholesome or indeterminate. The con-
ditioned states are the mental states associated with each root and the
conascent material phenomena. Conascent material phenomena are those
born of kamma at the moment of rebirth-linking, and those born of con-
sciousness during the course of existence. Just as the roots of a tree are
`308
TABLE 8.3: CONDITIONING AND CONDITIONED STATES
OF THE TWENTY-FOUR CONDITIONS
Condition	Conditioning States	Conditioned States
Root	6 roots	71 rtd. cittas, 52 cetas. exc. delusion conas. w. 2 delus.-rtd. cittas, mat. bom of rtd. cittas, kamma-born mat. at rtd. reb.
Object	89 cittas, 52 cetas., 28 mat., Nibbana, concepts	89 cittas, 52 cetas.
Predominance (1)	Object ” (2)	Conascence "	18 concrete mat., 84 cittas (exc. 2 hate-rtd., 2 delus, rtd., body-cons. w. pain), 47 cetas. (exc. hate, envy, avarice, worry, doubt), Nibbana One of 3 predom. factors (desire, energy, wisdom) conas. w. 52 predom. javs., citta of those 52 javs.	8 greed-rtd. cittas, 8 gt. wh. cittas, 4 gt. fnc. cittas w. knwl., 8 spm. cittas, 45 cetas. (exc. hate, etc., 2 illimitables) 52 predom. javs., 51 cetas. (exc. doubt) other than predom. factor, mat. bom of predom. citta
Proximity	Preceding 89 cittas (exc. Arh.’s death cons.), 52 cetas.	Succeeding 89 cittas, 52 cetas.
Contiguity	Same as 4	Same as 4
Conascence	(a) Both at reb. and exs.: 89 cittas, 52 cetas. which support each other and conascent mat. A ciirvnort orirl	89 cittas, 52 cetas. supported by each other, conascent mat.
Conascence	(a) Both at reb. and exs.: 89 cittas, 52 cetas.	89 cittas, 52 cetas. supported by each other,
	which support each other and conascent mat.	conascent mat.
	(b) 4 gt. ess. which support each other and	4 gt. ess. supported by each other, derived
	derived mat.	conascent mat.
TABLE 8.3 - Continued		
Condition	Conditioning States	Conditioned States
	(c) At reb. in 5-aggr. planes: 4 mental aggrs. and heart-base	Heart-base supported by mental aggrs.; mental aggrs. supported by heart-base
Mutuality	(a) Both at reb. and exs.: 89 cittas, 52 cetas.	89 cittas, 52 cetas. (mutually)
	UIfU	八mm iTy ti、ai
Mutuality	(a)	Both at reb. and exs.: 89 cittas, 52 cetas. (b)	4 gt. ess. (c)	Same as 6(c)	89 cittas, 52 cetas. (mutually) 4 gt. ess. (mutually) Same as 6(c)
Support (1)	Conascence " (2)	Prenascence " (a)	Base- •• •’ (b)	Base-object-""	Same as 6 During exs.: 6 mat. bases The heart-base taken as object of the same citta and cetas. it supports as base	Same as 6 In 5-aggr. planes: 85 cittas (exc. 4 IS rsts.), 52 cetas. M-d-advt., 29 SS javs., 11 regs., 44 cetas. (exc. envy, avarice, worry, 3 abstinences, 2 illimitables) taking their heart-base as object
Decisive support (1)	Object "" (2)	Proxim."" (3)	Natural ""	Same as 3(1) Same as 4 Strong past 89 cittas, 52 cetas., 28 mat., some concepts	Same as 3(1) Same as 4 Later 89 cittas, 52 cetas.
).Prenascence (1)	Base " (2)	Object "	Same as 8(2)(a) Present 18 concrete mat.	Same as 8(2)(a) 54 SS cittas, 2 dir-knwl., 50 cetas. (exc. 2 illimitables)
Condition	Conditioning States	Conditioned States
11. Postnascence	In 5-aggr. planes: later 85 cittas starting from first bhv., 52 cetas.	In 5-aggr. planes; mat. of body arisen along with preceding citta, from reb. on, at phase of presence
12. Repetition	47 mun. javs. exc. last jav. of same kind, 52 cetas.	Following 51 javs. exc. first jav. and fruit jav.
13. Kamma (1)	Conascent " (2)	Asynchronous "	Volition in 89 cittas 33 past wh. and unwh. volitions	89 cittas, 51 cetas. (exc. volition), conascent mat. 36 rst. cittas, 38 cetas., kamma-born mat.
14. Result	Both at reb. and exs.: 36 rst. cittas, 38 cetas. which support each other and conascent mat.	36 rst. cittas, 38 cetas. (mutually), conas. mat. exc. 2 intimations
15. Nutriment (1)	Material " (2)	Mental "	(a)	Nutr. essence in food (b)	Internal nutr. essence in groups bom of 4 causes Contact, volition, citta	Mat. bom of nutriment Mat. of same group (exc. nutr. essence), all mat. of other groups 89 cittas, 52 cetas., mat. conas. w. each nutriment
16. Faculty (1)	Prenascence " (2)	Material life •’ (3)	Conascence "	5 mat. sensitivities Mat. life faculty at reb. and during exs. 8 mental faculties: life, citta, feeling, faith, energy, mindfulness, one-ptns., wisdom	10 sense cons., 7 univ. cetas. 9 kamma-born mat. conas. w. life faculty 89 cittas, 52 cetas., mat. conas. w. faculties
Condition
17. Jhana
Conditioning States
In. applic., sus. applic., zest, feeling, one-ptns.
conas. w. 79 cittas (exc. 10 sense cons.)
Conditioned States
79 cittas (exc. 10 sense cons.), 52 cetas.,
conascent mat.
18. Path
)cetas. conas. w. 71 rtd. cittas; wisdom, in. applic.
3 abstinences, energy, mindfulness, one-ptns, view
71 rtd. cittas, 52 cetas., mat. conas. w. rtd. cittas
19. Association
Same as 7(a)
Same as 7(a)
20. Dissociation
(1) Conascence
(2) Prenascence
(a)	In 5-aggr. planes: at reb. and exs., 75 cittas
(exc. 4 IS rsts., 10 sense cons., Arh.’s death
cons.), 52 cetas.
(b)	Same as 6(c)
Same as 8(2)(a) and (b)
Conascent mat.
Same as 6(c)
Same as 8(2)(a) and (b)
(3) Postnascence "	Same as 11	Same as 11
21. Presence		
(1) Conascence "	Same as 6	Same as 6
(2) Prenascence "	Same as 10	Same as 10
(3) Postnascence "	Same as 11	Same as 11
(4) Nutriment "	Same as 15(1)	Same as 15(1)
(5) Faculty "	Same as 16(2)	Same as 16(2)
22. Absence	Same as 4	Same as 4
23. Disappearance	Same as 4	Same as 4
24. Non-disappearance	Same as 21	Same as 21
`312
the basis for a tree’s existence, growth, and stability, so these roots give
rise to the conditioned states and make them firm and steady.
Jhana condition (17) is a condition where a conditioning state causes
the conditioned states to participate in the close contemplation of an
object. The conditioning states are the seven jhana factors, which re-
duce to five cetasikas (see VII, §16, §23). The conditioned states are
the cittas and cetasikas associated with the jhana factors —that is, all cittas
except the ten types of sense consciousness—and the conascent mate-
rial phenomena. Although the conascent material phenomena cannot con-
template the object themselves, because they are produced by the close
contemplation accomplished by the jhana factors they are included among
the conditioned states.
Path condition (18) is a condition where a conditioning state relates
to the conditioned states by causing them to function as a means for
reaching a particular destination. The conditioning states in this relation
are the twelve path factors, which reduce to nine cetasikas (see VII, §17,
§23). The four wrong path factors are the means for reaching the woe-
ful destinations; the eight right path factors are the means for reaching
the blissful destinations and Nibbana. The conditioned states are all cittas
except the eighteen that are rootless, the associated cetasikas, and the
conascent material phenomena. While the path factors in the resultant
and functional cittas do not lead to any destinations, they are still classed
as path factors because, considered abstractly in their own nature, they
are identical with those capable of leading to different destinations.
Kamma condition (13): This condition is of two kinds: (i) conascent
kamma condition {sahajata-kammapaccaya), and (ii) asynchronous
kamma condition (nanakkhanika-kcimmapaccaya).
(i)	In the conascent kamma condition, the conditioning states are the
volitions (cetana) in the eighty-nine cittas. The conditioned states are
the citta and cetasikas associated with those volitions and the conascent
material phenomena. Volition here functions as a conascent kamma
condition by causing its concomitants to perform their respective tasks
and by arousing the appropriate kinds of material phenomena simulta-
neously with its own arising.
(ii)	In the asynchronous kamma condition there is a temporal gap
between the conditioning state and the conditioned states. The condi-
tioning state in this relation is a past wholesome or an unwholesome
volition. The conditioned states are the resultant cittas, their cetasikas,
and material phenomena born of kamma, both at rebirth-linking and in
the course of existence. The conditioning force here is the ability of such
volition to generate the appropriate resultant mental states and kamma-
born materiality. This conditional relation also obtains between a path
consciousness and its fruition.
`313
Result condition (14) is a condition where a conditioning state makes
the conditioned states that arise together with it be as passive, effort-
less, and quiescent as itself. The conditioning states in this relation are
the resultant cittas and cetasikas. The conditioned states are those same
resultants with respect to each other and the conascent material phenom-
ena. Since resultants are produced from the maturing of kamma, they
are not active but passive and quiescent. Thus in the mind of a person
in deep sleep, the resultant bhavanga consciousness arises and passes
away in constant succession, yet during this time no efforts are made
for action by body, speech, or mind, and there is not even distinct aware-
ness of an object. Similarly, in the five-door cognitive process, the re-
sultant cittas do not make an exertion to know their object. It is only in
the javana phase that effort is made to clearly cognize the object, and
again it is only in the javana phase that actions are performed.
§15 Mind for Matter
|8.18
Only in one way is mind a condition for matter: Subsequent consciousness and mental factors are a condition for this preceding (material) body by way of postnascence.
|
Guide to §15
Postnascence condition (11) is a condition where a conditioning state
assists conditioned states that had arisen prior to itself by supporting and
strengthening them. The conditioning states in this relation are subse-
quently arisen cittas and cetasikas, the conditioned states are the mate-
rial phenomena of the body born of all four causes, which material
phenomena had arisen along with preceding cittas. This condition be-
gins with the first bhavanga in relation to the material phenomena born
of kamma at the moment of rebirth-linking. Just as the rainwater that
falls later promotes the growth and development of the already existing
vegetation, so the subsequently arisen mental states support the pre-arisen
material phenomena so that they continue to produce similar material
phenomena in succession.
`314
§16 Matter for Mind
|8.19
Only in one way is matter a condition for mind: The six bases during the course of existence are a condition for the seven elements of consciousness, and the five objects for the five processes of sense consciousness, by way of prenascence.
|
Guide to §16
Prenascence condition (10) is a condition where a conditioning
state —a material state which has already arisen and reached the stage
of presence {thiti)causes mental states, the conditioned states, to arise
after it. This is like the sun, which arises first in the world and gives
light to people who appear after it has arisen. There are two main types
of prenascence condition, (i) base prenascence (vatthu-purejata) and
(ii) object prenascence (arammana-purejata).
(i) Each of the six physical bases during the course of existence is a
conditioning state by way of base prenascence for the citta and
cetasikas —the conditioned states —that take it as the material support
for their arising (see III, §§20-22). The heart-base is not a prenascence
condition for the mental states at the moment of rebirth-linking, since
on that occasion the heart-base and mental states arise simultaneously
as conascence and mutuality conditions. But the heart-base arisen at the
rebirth moment becomes a prenascence condition for the first bhavanga
citta immediately following the rebirth consciousness, and thereafter it
becomes a prenascence condition for all mind element and mind-con-
sciousness element cittas during the course of life.
(ii) Each of the five sense objects is a conditioning state by way of
object prenascence for the citta and cetasikas in a sense door cognitive
process that take it as object. In addition, all eighteen types of concretely
produced matter (see VI, §2) that have reached the stage of presence
can become object prenascence condition for the cittas and cetasikas in
a mind-door process.
§17 Concepts and Mind-and-Matter for Mind
`315
|8.20
In two ways concepts and mind-and-matter are conditions for mind—namely, by way of object and decisive support.
|8.21
Therein, object is sixfold as visible form, etc. 
|8.22
But decisive support is threefold, namely, object decisive support, proximity decisive support, and natural decisive support.
|8.23
Of them, the object itself when it becomes prominent serves as object decisive support.
|8.24
Consciousness and mental factors that immediately cease, act as the proximity decisive support. 
|8.25
The natural decisive support is of many kinds: states of lust, etc” states of faith, etc., pleasure, pain, individuals, food, season, lodgings—(all such things) internal and external, as the case may be, are conditions forwholesome states, etc. Kamma, too, is similarly a condition for its results.
|
Guide to §17
Object condition (2) is a condition where a conditioning state, as
object, causes other states, the conditioned states, to arise taking it as
their object. The six classes of objects (see III, §16) are the condition-
ing states in this relation, the corresponding cittas and cetasikas are the
conditioned states.
Decisive support condition (9): Of the three types of this condition:
(i) Object decisive support {arammannpanissaya) is a condition
where the conditioning state is an exceptionally desirable or important
object which causes the conditioned states, the mental phenomena that
apprehend it, to arise in strong dependence on it.
(ii)	Proximity decisive support (anantanipanissaya) is identical with
proximity condition with respect to the conditioning and conditioned
states, but differs from it slightly in the forces of the conditions. Prox-
imity is the force which causes the succeeding mental states to arise
immediately after the preceding states have ceased; proximity decisive
support is the force which causes the succeeding states to arise because
they are strongly dependent on the ceasing of the preceding states.
(iii)	Natural decisive support {pakatupanissayo) is a wide relation that
includes as the conditioning states all past mental or material phenom-
ena that become strongly efficacious for the arising, at a subsequent time, 
of the conditioned states, which are subsequent cittas and cetasikas. For
example, prior lust may be a natural decisive support condition for the
volitions of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, etc.; prior faith for the
`316
volitions of giving alms, undertaking precepts, and practising medita-
tion; the gaining of health for happiness and energy, the onset of sick-
ness for sorrow and torpor, etc.
§18 Mind-and-Matter for Mind-and-Matter
|8.26
Mind-and-matter is a condition for mind-and-matter in nine ways according to circumstances, namely, by way of predominance, conascence, mutuality, support, nutriment, faculty, dissociation, pres-
ence, and non-disappearance.
|
Guide to §18
These conditions will be elaborated upon in the following sections.
§19 The Predominance Condition
|8.27
Therein, the predominance condition is twofold:
(i) The object to which weight is attached is a condition for states of mind by way of object predominance.
(ii) The fourfold conascent predominance is a condition for conascent mind-and-matter by way of conascence.
|
Guide to §19
Predominance condition (3): Of the two types of this condition:
(i) Object predominance (cirammanadhipati) is a condition where the
conditioning state, as object, dominates over the mental states which take
it as their object. Only those objects which are esteemed, cherished, or
strongly desired can become the conditioning states in this relation. This
condition is virtually identical with the object decisive support condi-
tion, differing from it only slightly in the conditioning forces: while the
latter has the force of being a strongly efficacious cause for the arising
of the citta and cetasikas, the former has the force of strongly attracting
and dominating those states.
`317
(ii) Conascence predominance (sahajatadhipati) is a condition where
a conditioning state dominates conditioned states conascent with itself.
The conditioning states in this relation are the four predominants—de-
sire, energy, consciousness, and investigation (see VII, §20). Only one
of these can take on the role of predominance condition on a given oc-
casion, and then only in javana cittas with two or three roots. The
conascent mental and material phenomena are the conditioned states.
§20 The Conascence Condition
|8.28
The conascence condition is threefold: consciousness and mental factors are a condition for one another and for the conascent material phenomena; the four great essentials mutually and for the derived material phenomena; the heart-base and the resultant (mental aggre-
gates) for one another at the moment of rebirth-linking.
|
Guide to §20
Conascence condition (6) is a condition where a conditioning state,
on arising, causes the conditioned states to arise simultaneously with
itself. This is compared to the flame of a lamp which, on arising, causes
the light, colour, and heat to arise along with it. This condition may be
divided into three types, as is done in the above text, or it may be more
finely divided into five types: (i) each mental state—citta or cetasika—
for the associated mental states; (ii) each mental state for the conascent
material phenomena; (iii) each of the four great essentials for the other
three great essentials; (iv) each of the four great essentials for derived
material phenomena; and (v) at the moment of rebirth-linking, the heart-
base for the resultant mental states, and the latter in turn for the heart-
base.
`318
§21 The Mutuality Condition
|8.29
The mutuality condition is threefold: consciousness and mental factors are a condition for one another; the four great essentials for one another; the heart-base and the resultant (mental aggregates) for one another at the moment of rebirth-linking.
|
Guide to §21
Mutuality condition (7) is actually a subordinate type of conascence
condition. In the general conascence condition, the conditioning state
simply causes the conditioned states to arise together with itself, but no
reciprocity in the conditioning force is required. However, in the mutu-
ality condition each of the conditioning states is, at the same time and
in the same way, a conditioned state in relation to the very states that it
conditions. Thus a conditioning state in the relation of mutuality gives
its force to the conditioned state and also receives the force of the con-
ditioned state, which is a conditioning state relative to itself. This is
compared to a tripod, each leg of which assists the other two legs recip-
rocally in enabling the tripod to stand upright.
§22 The Support Condition
|8.30
The support condition is threefold: consciousness and mental factors are a condition for one another and conascent material phenomena; the four great essentials for one another and derived material phenomena; and the six bases for the seven consciousness elements.
|
Guide to §22
Support condition (8) is a condition where the conditioning state
causes the conditioned states to arise by serving as the support or foun-
dation on which they depend. The conditioning state is said to be re-
lated to the conditioned state in a manner similar to the way the earth
supports trees and vegetation or a canvas supports a painting.
Two main categories of support condition are recognized: (i)
conascence support (sahajata-nissaya) and (ii) prenascence support
(purejata-nissaya). Conascence support condition is identical in all re-
spects with the conascence condition. Prenascence support condition
includes two subsidiary types. One is simple base-prenascence support
(vatthu-purejata-nissaya), which is identical with base prenascence, dis-
cussed under the prenascence condition. The other is called base-object-
`319
prenascence support (vatthcirammana-purejata-nissaya). This refers to
the special case when a citta arises supported by the heart-base and at
the same time makes that heart-base its object. Thus on such an occa-
sion the heart-base is simultaneously a support and an object for a sin-
gle citta. Referring to this condition, the Patthana states: “One
contemplates with insight that internal base as impermanent, suffering,
non-self; one enjoys it and delights in it; making it an object, lust arises,
wrong view arises, doubt arises, restlessness arises, displeasure arises.” 3
§23 The Nutriment Condition
|8.31
The nutriment condition is twofold: edible food is a condition for this body; and immaterial nutriment, for the conascent mind-and-matter.
|
Guide to §23
Nutriment condition (15) is a condition where a conditioning state
relates to the conditioned states by producing them, maintaining them in
existence, and supporting their growth and development. This is com-
pared to a prop which supports an old house and prevents it from col-
lapsing. Thus the essential function of nutriment is supporting or
reinforcing (upattlmmbana).
The nutriment condition is twofold: (i) material nutriment {rupahara)
and mental nutriment (ncimahara).
(i)	Material nutriment is the nutritive essense found in edible food,
which is a conditioning state for this physical body. When food is in-
gested its nutritive essence produces new matter born of nutriment, and
it also reinforces the material groups born of all four causes, keeping
them strong and fresh so that they can continue to arise in succession.
The internal nutriment contained in the material groups born of all four
causes also serves as a condition by reinforcing the internal material phe-
nomena coexisting with it in its own group and the material phenom-
ena in the other groups situated in the body.
(ii)	Mental nutriment is threefold: the nutriments contact, mental voli-
tion, and consciousness. These are conditions for the conascent mental
and material phenomena.
`320
§24 The Faculty Condition
|8.32
The faculty condition is threefold: the five sensitive organs are a condition for the five kinds of consciousness; the material life faculty, for the material phenomena born of kamma; the immaterial faculties, for conascent mind-and-matter.
|
Guide to §24
Faculty condition (16) is a condition where a conditioning state re-
lates to the conditioned states by exercising control in a particular de-
partment or function. This condition is compared to a panel of ministers,
each of whom has freedom of control in governing his particular region
of the countiy and does not attempt to govern the other regions. As stated
in the text, there are three types of faculty condition: (i) prenascence
faculty, (ii) material life faculty, and (iii) conascence faculty.
(i) In prenascence faculty, each of the five sensitivities
(arisen at the static phase of the past bhavanga citta) is a faculty condi-
tion for its respective type of sense consciousness along with its cetasikas.
This is so because the sensitive organ controls the efficiency of the con-
sciousness that takes it as a base. For example, good eyes produce acute
vision while weak eyes result in poor vision.
(ii)	The material life faculty in the material groups born of kamma is
a faculty condition for the other nine material phenomena in the same
groups, for it controls them by maintaining their vitality.
(iii)	The fifteen immaterial faculties (see VII, §18) are each a
conascence faculty condition for the associated mental states and the
conascent material phenomena.
Of the faculties, the two sex faculties of femininity and masculinity
do not become conditioning states in the faculty condition. They are
excluded because they do not have the functions of a condition. A con-
dition has three functions —producing, supporting and maintaining —but
the sex faculties do not execute any of these functions. Nevertheless,
they are still classed as faculties because they control the sexual struc-
ture, appearance, character, and disposition of the body, so that the whole
personality tends towards either femininity or masculinity.4
`321
§25 The Dissociation Condition
|8.33
The dissociation condition is threefold: at the moment of rebirth-linking the heart-base is a condition for resultant (mental aggregates), and consciousness and mental factors for conascent matter, by way of conascence; the postnascent consciousness and mental factors for this prenascent material body by way of postnascence; the six bases, in the course of life, for the seven consciousness elements by way of prenascence.
|
Guide to §25
Dissociation condition (20) is a condition where the conditioning state
is either a mental phenomenon that assists present material phenomena,
or a material phenomenon that assists present mental phenomena. In this
relationship the two components—the conditioning state and the condi-
tioned states —are necessarily of different types: if one is matter the other
must be mind; if one is mind the other must be matter. This is like a mix-
ture of water and oil, which remain separate though placed together.
Thus at the moment of rebirth the heart-base and the mental aggre-
gates arise simultaneously, each a dissociation condition for the other
by reason of the particular characteristics that distinguish them as ma-
terial and mental phenomena. At the moment of rebirth, again, the mental
aggregates are a condition for the other kinds of kamma-born matter,
and during the course of existence for mind-born matter, by way of dis-
sociation condition. Dissociation also comprises prenascent and post-
nascent types: the former obtains between matter as the conditioning state
and mind as the conditioned state; the latter obtains between mind as
the conditioning state and matter as the conditioned state. These are iden-
tical with prenascence support condition and postnascence condition, re-
spectively.
`322
§26 Presence and Non-Disappearance
|8.34
The presence and non-disappearance conditions are altogether of five kinds: conascence, prenascence, postnascence, edible food, and material life.
|
Guide to §26
Presence condition (21), non-disappearance condition (24): These
are two conditions identical in meaning and differing only in the letter.
In this relationship a conditioning state helps the conditioned states to
arise or persist in being during a time when it exists alongside the con-
ditioned states. It is not necessary, however, for the conditioning state
and the conditioned states to be conascent; all that is required is for the
two to temporally overlap, and for the conditioning state to support in
some way the conditioned states during the time they overlap. Thus pres-
ence condition includes prenascence and postnascence as well as
conascence. While the text mentions only five types of presence condi-
tion, since these five in turn include additional subsidiary types, pres-
ence condition comprises a wide variety of other conditions. This will
become clear in the next section, which deals with the subsumption of
all conditional relations under four master conditions.
§27 The Synthesis of Conditions
|8.35
All conditions are included in the conditions of object, decisive support, kamma, and presence.
|8.36
Herein, in all cases conascent material phenomena should be understood as twofold: throughout the course of existence they should be understood as those bom of consciousness, and at rebirth-linking, as those born of kamma.
|
Guide to §27
The way in which all conditions are included in these four conditions is explained by Ledi Sayadaw in his commentary as follows:
The predominance condition being twofold, object predominance is always comprised by the object and decisive support conditions, and
`323
TABLE 8.4: THE SYNTHESIS OF CONDITIONS
Object	Decisive Support	Kamma	Presence
Object predominance	Object predominance	Asynchronous kamma	Object predominance*
Base-object-prenascence	Base-object prenascence		Conascence predominance*
support	support*		Conascence support
Object prenascence	Object prenascence*		Base-prenascence support
Dissociation*	Asynchronous kamma* Dissociation* Proximity Contiguity Repetition Absence Disappearance		Base-object-prenascence support Base prenascence Object prenascence Conascent kamma Dissociation Root Conascence Mutuality Result Nutriment Faculty Jhana Path Association Non-disapearance Postnascence
`324
sometimes by the presence condition as well; while conascence predomi-
nance is comprised by the presence condition.
The main types of support condition—conascence support and base-
prenascence support —both come within the scope of the presence con-
dition. The special case of base-object-prenascence support, in which
the heart-base becomes an object of the same mind-door cittas it sup-
ports as a base, is included in both object and presence conditions, and
in decisive support as well if the heart-base is given special importance
as object.
Of the two main types of prenascence condition, base prenascence is
included in presence condition while object prenascence is included in
both object and presence and possibly in decisive support too.
Of the two types of kamma condition, conascent kamma is included
in presence condition, while asynchronous kamma is included in kamma
condition and, if strong, in decisive support as well.
Dissociation condition is included in presence condition, but if the
heart-base becomes simultaneously base and object, it is included in
presence, object, and possibly decisive support.
Of the remaining conditions, the following eleven are always included
within presence condition: root, conascence, mutuality, resultant, nutri-
ment, faculty, jhana, path, association, non-disappearance, and
postnascence. The following five are always included in decisive sup-
port condition: proximity, contiguity, repetition, absence, and disappear-
ance.
The manner in which the various conditions are subsumed under the
main types of conditions is shown schematically in Table 8.4.
§28 Summary
|8.37
Thus the things pertaining to the three periods of time and timeless, internal and external, conditioned and unconditioned, are three-fold by way of concepts, mind, and matter.
In all, the conditions in the scheme of conditional relations are twenty-four.
|
`325
Analysis of Concepts
(pannattibheda)
§29 In Brief
|8.38
Therein, the material phenomena are just the aggregate of matter.
Consciousness and mental factors, which comprise the four immaterial aggregates, and Nibbana, are the five kinds that are immaterial.
They are also called “name”
|8.39
What remains are concepts, which are twofold: concept as that which is made known, and concept as that which makes known.
|
Guide to §29
At this point Acariya Anuruddha has completed his exposition of the
four ultimate realities, their classification in various schemata, and their
treatment according to the principles of conditionality. However, he has
not yet discussed concepts {pannatti). Although concepts pertain to con-
ventional reality and not to ultimate reality, they are still included in
the Abhidhamma by the treatise Puggalapannatti. Therefore in the last
part of Chapter VIII he will briefly discuss concepts.
They are also called “name”： The four immaterial aggregates are
called nama, “name,” in the sense of bending (namana) because they
bend towards the object in the act of cognizing it. They are also called
ncima in the sense of causing to bend {namana) since they cause one
another to bend on to the object. Nibbana is called ncima solely in the
sense of causing to bend. For Nibbana causes faultless states—that is,
the supramundane cittas and cetasikas —to bend on to itself by acting
as an objective predominance condition.5
What remains are concepts: There are two kinds of concepts,
atthapannatti or concepts-as-meanings, and namapannatti or concepts-
as-names. The former are the meanings conveyed by the concepts, the
latter the names or designations which convey that meaning. For exam-
ple, the notion of a four-legged furry domestic animal with certain physi-
cal features and traits is the concept-as-meaning of the term “dog”； the
designation and idea “dog” is the corresponding concept-as-name. The
`326
meaning-concept is the concept as that which is made known; the name-
concept is the concept as that which makes known.
§30 Concept as What is Made Known
|8.40
How? There are such terms as “land,” “mountain, ” and the like, so designated on account of the mode of transition of the respective elements; such terms as “house,” “chariot,” “cart,” and the like, so named on account of the mode of formation of materials; such terms as “person, ” “individual, ” and the like, so named on account of the five aggregates; such terms as “direction, ” “time, ” and the like, named according to the revolution of the moon and so forth; such terms as “well, ” “cave,” and the like, so named on account of the mode of non-impact and so forth; such terms as kasina signs and the like, so named on account of respective elements and distinguished mental development.
All such different things, though they do not exist in the ultimate sense, become objects of consciousness in the form of shadows of (ultimate) things.
They are called concepts because they are thought of, reckoned, understood, expressed, and made known on account of, in consideration of, with respect to, this or that mode. This kind of concept is so called because it is made known.
|
Guide to §30
“Concept as what is made known” is the same as meaning-concept
(atthapannatti). Here the author enumerates different types of meaning-
concepts.
Land, mountain, etc., are called in Pali santhanapannatti, formal
concepts, since they correspond to the form or configuration of things.
`327
House, chariot, village, etc., are called samUhapannatti, collective
concepts, since they correspond to a collection or group of things.
East, west, etc., are called disapannatti, local concepts, since they
correspond to a locality or direction.
Morning, noon, week, month, etc., are called kalapcinnatti, temporal
concepts, since they correspond to periods or units of time.
Well, cave, etc., are called akasapannatti, spatial concepts, since they
correspond to spatial regions void of perceptible matter.
The kasina signs are called nimittapannatti, sign concepts, since they
correspond to mental signs gained by meditative development.
§31 Concept as What Makes Known
|8.41
Then, as it makes known, it is called concept. It is described as name, nomenclature, etc.
It is sixfold: (1) a (direct) concept of the real; (2) a (direct) concept of the unreal; (3) a concept of the unreal by means of the real; (4) a concept of the real by means of the unreal; (5) a concept of the real by means of the real; and (6) a concept of the unreal by means of the unreal.
|8.42
As, for instance, when it makes known what really exists in the ultimate sense by a term such as “matter, ” “feeling, ” and so forth, it is called a (direct) concept of the real.
When it makes known what does not really exist in the ultimate sense by a term, such as “land,” “mountain,” and so forth, it is called a (direct) concept of the unreal.
The rest should be respectively understood by combining both as, for instance, “possessor of sixfold direct knowledge, ” “woman’s voice,” “eye-consciousness, ” and “king’s son.”
|
`328
Guide to §31
“Concept as what makes known” is the same as name concept
(namapannatti). Again, the author provides an enumeration of instances.
A (direct) concept of the real: Matter, feeling, etc., are ultimate
realities; therefore the concepts that designate them are direct concepts
of the real.
A (direct) concept of the unreal: “Land” and “mountain,” etc., are
not ultimate realities but conventional entities established conceptually
through mental construction. Though these concepts are based on ulti-
mate entities, the meanings they convey are not things that are them-
selves ultimate entities since they do not correspond to things that exist
by way of their own intrinsic nature (sabhavato).
The rest should be respectively understood: Here, “possessor of
sixfold direct knowledge” is a concept of the unreal by means of the real,
since the direct knowledges are ultimately real but the “possessor” is a
mental construction. “Woman’s voice” is a concept of the real by means
of the unreal, since the sound of the voice ultimately exists but not the
woman. “Eye-consciousness” is a concept of the real by means of the
real, since both eye-sensitivity and the consciousness dependent on it
exist in an ultimate sense. “King’s son” is a concept of the unreal by way
of the unreal, since neither the king nor the son ultimately exists. 6
§32 Summary
|8.43
By following the sound of speech through the process of ear-consciousness, and then by means of the concept conceived by (the process in the) mind-door that subsequently arises, meanings are understood. These concepts should be understood as fashioned by worldly convention.
Thus ends the eighth chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Conditionality.
|
`329
chapter IX
COMPENDIUM OF MEDITATION SUBJECTS
(Kammatthanasangahavibhaga)
§1 Introductory Verse
|9.1
From here on I will explain in order the two types of meditation subject for the respective development of calm and insight.
|
Guide to §1
Two types of meditation subject: The Pali term kammattliana means
literally “field of action” or “workplace.” The term is used to designate
a subject of meditation, the workplace for the meditator to develop the
special attainments in the field of contemplation. In Buddhism two
approaches to meditative development are recognized, calm and insight.
Of the two, the development of insight is the distinctively Buddhistic
form of meditation. This system of meditation is unique to the Buddha’s
Teaching and is intended to generate direct personal realization of the
truths discovered and enunciated by the Buddha. The development of
calm is also found in non-Buddhist schools of meditation. However, in
the Buddha’s Teaching calming meditation is taught because the serenity
and concentration which it engenders provide a firm foundation for the
practice of insight meditation. Each of the two types of meditation has
its own methodology and range of meditation subjects, to be explained
in the course of this chapter.
Calm and insight: The word samatha, rendered “calm,” denotes quie-
tude of mind. The word is almost synonymous with concentration
{samadhi), though it derives from a different root, sam, meaning to be-
come peaceful. Technically, samatha is defined as the one-pointedness
of mind (cittass 'ekaggata) in the eight meditative attainments —the four
fine-material-sphere jhanas of the Suttanta system (five in the Abhi-
dhamma system) and the four immaterial-sphere jhanas. These attainments
are called calm because, owing to the one-pointedness of mind, the waver-
ing or trepidation of the mind is subdued and brought to an end.1
`330
The word vipassana, rendered “insight, ” is explained as seeing in
diverse ways (vividhcikarato das sand). Insight is the direct meditative
perception of phenomena in terms of the three characteristics—imper-
manence, suffering, and non-self. It is a function of the cetasika of wis-
dom (pafina) directed towards uncovering the true nature of things.
The explanation of calm and insight meditation in this chapter of the
Abhidhammattha Sangaha is a summary of the entire Visuddhimagga,
to which the reader is referred for an elaborate treatment of these topics.
Compendium of Calm
(samathasangaha)
Basic Categories
§2 Meditation Subjects
|9.2
Therein, in the compendium of calm, first the compendium of meditation subjects for developing calm is sevenfold: (1) ten kasinas, (2) ten kinds of foulness, (3) ten recollections, (4) four illimitables, (5) one perception, (6) one analysis, and (7) four immaterial states.
|
Guide to §2
These seven categories amount to forty separate meditation subjects, to be enumerated in §§6-12. See Table 9.1.
§3 Temperaments
|9.3
The compendium of temperaments is sixfold: (1) the lustful, (2) the hateful, (3) the deluded, (4) the faithful, (5) the intellectual, and (6) the discursive.
|
Guide to §3
“Temperament” (carita) means personal nature, the character of a
person as revealed by his or her natural attitudes and conduct. The tem-
peraments of people differ owing to the diversity of their past kammas.
`331
The commentators state that the temperament is determined by the
kamma productive of the rebirth-linking consciousness.
Of the six temperaments, the lustful and the faithful types form a
parallel pair since both involve a favourable attitude towards the object,
one unwholesome, the other wholesome. So too, the hateful and the in-
tellectual temperaments form a parallel pair, since in an unwholesome
way hate turns away from its object, while intelligence does so through
the discovery of genuine faults. The deluded and the discursive tempera-
ments also form a pair, since a deluded person vacillates owing to super-
ficiality, while a discursive one does so due to facile speculation. For
more on the temperaments, see Vism. III, 74-102.
§4 Development
|9.4
The three stages of mental development are: preliminary development, access development, and absorption development.
|
Guide to §4
Preliminary development occurs from the time one begins the practice of meditation up to the time the five hindrances are suppressed and the counterpart sign emerges. Access development occurs when the five hindrances become suppressed and the counterpart sign emerges. It endures
from the moment the counterpart sign arises up to the change-of-lineage
citta (gotrabhii) in the cognitive process culminating in jhana. The citta
that immediately follows change-of-lineage is called absorption. This
marks the beginning of absorption development, which occurs at the level
of the fine-material-sphere jhanas or the immaterial-sphere jhanas.
§5 Signs
|9.5
The three signs should be understood as: the preliminary sign, the learning sign, and the counterpart sign.
|
Guide to §5
The preliminary sign is the original object of concentration used
during the preliminary stage of practice. The learning sign is a mental
`332
replica of the object perceived in the mind exactly as it appears to the
physical eyes. The mentally visualized image freed of all defects is the
counterpart sign. The counterpart sign, it is said, “appears as if break-
ing out from the learning sign, and a hundred times or a thousand times
more purified, ... like the moon’s disk coming out from behind a cloud”
(Vism. IV, 31). See too §17 below.
The Forty Meditation Subjects
(kammatthanasamuddesa)
§6 The Kasinas
|9.6
How? The ten kasinas are: the earth kasina, the water kasina, the fire kasina, the air kasina, the blue kasina, the yellow kasina, the red kasina, the white kasina, the space kasina, and the light kasina.
|
Guide to §6
The ten kasinas: The word kasina means “whole” or “totality.” It is
so called because the counterpart sign is to be expanded and extended
everywhere without limitation.
The earth kasina, etc.: In the case of the earth kasina one prepares
a disk of about thirty centimeters in diameter, covers it with clay the
colour of the dawn, and smoothens it well. This is the kasina-disk, which
serves as the preliminary sign for developing the earth kasina. One then
places the disk about a meter away and concentrates on it with the eyes
partly opened, contemplating it as “earth, earth.”
To develop the water kasina one may use a vessel full of clear water
and contemplate it as “water, water.” To develop the fire kasina one may
kindle a fire and view it through a hole in a piece of leather or a piece
of cloth, thinking “fire, fire.” One who develops the air kasina concen-
trates on the wind that enters through a window or an opening in the
wall, thinking “air, air.”
To develop the colour kasinas one may prepare a disk of the pre-
scribed size and colour it blue, yellow, red or white. Then one should
concentrate upon it by mentally repeating the name of the colour. One
may even prepare an object from flowers of the required colour.
The light kasina may be developed by concentrating on the moon or
on an unflickering lamplight, or on a circle of light cast on the ground,
`333
or on a beam of sunlight or moonlight entering through a wall-crevice
or hole and cast on a wall.
The space kasina can be developed by concentrating on a hole about
thirty centimeters in diameter, contemplating it as “space, space.”
For a full treatment of the kasinas, see Vism. IV and V.
§7 Foulness
|9.7
The ten kinds of foulness are: a bloated corpse, a livid corpse, a festering corpse, a dismembered corpse, an eaten corpse, a scattered-in-pieces corpse, a mutilated and scattered-in-pieces corpse, a bloody corpse, a worm-infested corpse, and a skeleton.
|
Guide to §7
The ten kinds of foulness are corpses in different stages of decay.
This set of meditation subjects is especially recommended for remov-
ing sensual lust. See Vism. VI.
§8 The Recollections
|9.8
The ten recollections are: the recollection of the Buddha, the recollection of the Dhamma, the recollection of the Sangha, the recollection of morality, the recollection of generosity, the recollection of the devas, the recollection of peace, the recollection of death, mindfulness occupied with the body, and mindfulness of breathing.
|
Guide to §8
The recollection of the Buddha, etc.: The first three recollections
are practised by calling to mind the virtues of the Buddha, the Dhamma,
or the Sangha, as enumerated in the traditional formulas.2
The recollection of morality is the practice of mindfully recollect-
ing the special qualities of virtuous conduct, considered as untorn and
free from breach and blemish.
`334
TABLE 9.1:
THE FORTY MEDITATION SUBJECTS AT A GLANCE
Subject	Temperament	Development	Sign	Jhana
Kasina (10)				
Earth kasina	All	Pr Ac Ab	Pr Ln Cp	1st to 5 th
Water "	»•	•t i« i«	n ti vi	" VI
Fire " A ：«. »•	VI 91	•« i« i« •• •« if	n •« vi ii ii ii	M It II It
Air Blue "	Hateful	•« i« •«	ii it ii	II tf
Yellow "	ft	•« if •«	it •« ii	II tf
Red "	»•	•« •• if	ii •« "	" tf
White "	VI	•« •« i«	•« •« ii	II It
Space "	All	•« i« •«	ii •« ii	" W
Light "	91	i« ii i«	i« •« it	" It
Foulness (10)				
Bloated corpse	Lustful	•• if ••	•• " it	1 st only
Discoloured "	ti	•• if ••	•• •• it	"
Festering	»•	•« if •«	•« •• "	i«
Dismembered "	n	•« if i«	•« i« it	•«
Eaten M	vi	•« if i«	•« i« it	"
Scattered	”	•« i« i«	•« i« it	i«
Mutilated ”	ti	•f i« i«	•i •« ii	i«
Bloody "	ti	•« •« i«	»i if ii	if
Worm-infested "	»•	•f •« i«	»i it ii	i«
Skeleton	"	•« •• i«	•« •« n	”
Recollections (10)				
`335
Buddha	Faithful	tl	tf	•«	M	None	
Dhamma	"	•«	•«	••	•I	it	
Sangha	»•	if	•«	if	•«	••	
TABLE 9.1 - Continued
Subject	Temperament	Development	Sign	Jhana
Morality	Faithful	Pr Ac ...	Pr Ln ...	None
Generosity	”	«V «f	•« •«	•«
Devas	”	«t «*	•« M	M
Peace	Intellectual	19 19	19 19	•f
Death	if	VV VV	•« II	•1
Body	Lustful	” ” Ab	” ” Cp	1st
Breathing	Deluded, discursive	•i ii ti	fl VI »•	1st to 5 th
	aiscursive						
Illimitables (4)							
Lovingkindness	Hateful	II	ii	II	象曹	91	1st to 4th
Compassion	••		it	•1	•1	•t	•• ••
Appreciative joy	••	«t	it	ft	ft	ft	•• VI
Equanimity	••	IV	«v	«V	"	•1	5th only
Perception (1)							
Food as loathsome	Intellectual	ii	tl		•I		None
Analysis (1)							
Four elements	Intellectual	ii	19		”	«V	None
Immaterial States							
Infinite space	All	it	”	ft	ft	«f	1st IS jhana
Infinite consness.	w	«*		••	ff	fl	2nd IS jhana
Nothingness	ii	"	•1	•I	fl	VI • ••	3rd IS jhana
Neither-perc.-nor-non-perc.	if	•«	II	•1	•I	•I	4th IS jhana
KEY: Pr = preliminary; Ac = access; Ab = absorption; Ln = learning; Cp = counterpart.
`336
The recollection of generosity involves mindful reflection on the special qualities of generosity.
The recollection of the devas is practised by mindfully considering: “The deities are bom in such exalted states on account of their faith, morality, learning, generosity, and wisdom. I too possess these same qualities.” This meditation subject is a term for mindfulness with the special qualities of one’s own faith, etc., as its object and with the devas standing as witnesses.
The recollection of peace is contemplation on the peaceful attributes of Nibbana.
The recollection of death is contemplation of the fact that one’s own death is absolutely certain, that the arrival of death is utterly uncertain, and that when death comes one must relinquish everything.
Mindfulness occupied with the body is contemplation of the thirty-two repulsive parts of the body—hairs of the head, hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, etc.
Mindfulness of breathing is attentiveness to the touch sensation of the in-breath and out-breath in the vicinity of the nostrils or upper lip, wherever the air is felt striking as one breathes in and out.
On the ten recollections, see Vism. VII and VIII.
§9 The Illimitables
|9.9
The four illimitables, also called divine abodes, are: loving-kindness, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity.
|
Guide to §9
The four illimitables: These states are called illimitables (appa-
mahha) because they are to be radiated towards all living beings with-
out limit or obstruction. They are also called brahmaviharas, “divine
abodes” or sublime states, because they are the mental dwellings of the
Brahma divinities in the Brahma-world.
Loving-kindness (metta) is the wish for the welfare and happiness
of all living beings. It helps to eliminate ill will.
Compassion {karuna) is that which makes the heart quiver when
others are subject to suffering. It is the wish to remove the suffering of
others, and it is opposed to cruelty.
Appreciative joy (mudita) is the quality of rejoicing at the success
and prosperity of others. It is the congratulatory attitude, and helps to
eliminate envy and discontent over the success of others.
`337
Equanimity (upekkha), as a divine abode, is the state of mind that
regards others with impartiality, free from attachment and aversion. An
impartial attitude is its chief characteristic, and it is opposed to favour-
itism and resentment.
For a full explanation of the divine abidings, see Vism. IX.
§10 One Perception
|9.10
The one perception is the perception of loathsomeness in food.
|
Guide to §10
The perception of the loathsomeness of food is the perception which
arises through reflection upon the repulsive aspects of nutriment, such
as the difficulty of searching for food, the repulsiveness of using it, the
digestive process, excretion, etc. See Vism. XI, 1-26.
§11 One Analysis
|9.11
The one analysis is the analysis of the four elements.
|
Guide to §11
The analysis into the four elements involves contemplation of the body
as compounded out of the four great essentials—the earth element as
manifested in the solid parts of the body, the water element in the bod-
ily fluids, the fire element in the body’s heat, and the air element in the
breath and vital currents. See Vism. XI, 27-117.
§12 The Immaterial States
|9.12
The four immaterial states are the base of infinite space, and so forth. Thus in the exposition of calm there are altogether forty subjects of meditation.
|
Guide to §12
These are the objects of the four immaterial jhanas: (1) the base of
infinite space; (2) the base of infinite consciousness; (3) the base of
`338
nothingness; and (4) the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
See Vism. X.
§13 Analysis of Suitability {sappayabheda)
|9.13
With respect to temperaments, the ten kinds of foulness and mindfulness occupied with the body, i.e. meditation on the thirty-two parts, are suitable for those of a lustful temperament.
|9.14
The four illimitables and the four coloured kasinas are suitable for those of a hateful temperament.
|9.15
Mindfulness of breathing is suitable for those of a deluded and discursive temperament.
|9.16
The six recollections of the Buddha, and so forth, are suitable for those of a faithful temperament; 
|9.17
recollection of death, of peace, the perception of loathsomeness in food, and the analysis of the four elements, are suitable for those of an intellectual temperament.
|9.18
All of the remaining subjects of meditation are suitable for all temperaments.
Of the kasinas, a wide one is suitable for one of deluded temperament, and a small one for one of discursive temperament.
Herein, this is the analysis by way of suitability.
|
Analysis of Development
(bhavanabheda)
`339
§14 By way of the Three Stages
|9.19
The preliminary stage of development is attainable in all these forty subjects of meditation. In ten subjects of meditation—the eight recollections of the Buddha and so forth, the one perception, and the one analysis—only access development is attained but not absorption. 
|9.20
In the thirty remaining subjects of meditation, the absorption stage of development is also attained.
|
Guide to §14
In the ten subjects beginning with the recollection of the Buddha, the mind is engaged in reflecting upon many different qualities and themes, and this involves an intense application of thought (vitakka) which prevents one-pointedness from gaining the fixity needed to attain absorption.
§15 By way of Jhana
|9.21
Therein, the ten kasinas and mindfulness of breathing produce five jhanas;
|9.22
the ten foulnesses and mindfulness occupied with the body (only) the first jhana;
|9.23
the first three illimitables, such as loving-kindness, four jhanas;
|9.24
equanimity, the fifth jhana (only).
Thus these twenty-six subjects of meditation produce fine-material-sphere jhanas.
|9.25
The four immaterial states produce immaterial jhanas.
Herein, this is the analysis by way of development.
|
Guide to §15
The ten kinds of foulness and mindfulness occupied with the body
both require the exercise of vitakka, and thus they are incapable of
`340
inducing the jhanas higher than the first, which are free from vitakka.
The first three illimitables necessarily arise in association with joyful
feeling (somanassa) and thus can lead only to the four lower jhanas,
which are accompanied by joyful feeling. The illimitable of equanimity
arises in association with neutral feeling, and thus can occur only at the
level of the fifth jhana, which is accompanied by equanimous feeling.
Analysis of the Terrain
[gocarabheda)
§16 The Signs
|9.26
Of the three signs, the preliminary sign and the learning sign are generally found in relation to every object, in the appropriate way.
|9.27
But the counterpart sign is found only in the kasinas, foulness, the parts of the body, and mindfulness of breathing. It is by means of the counterpart sign that access concentration and absorption concentration occur.
|
§17 Appearance of the Signs in Meditation
|9.28
How? When a beginner apprehends a particular sign from the earth disk, etc., that object is called the preliminary sign, and that meditation is called preliminary development.
|9.29
When that sign has been thoroughly apprehended and enters into range of the mind door just as if it were seen by the eye, then it is called the learning sign, and that meditation becomes concentrated.
|9.30
When one is thus concentrated, one then applies oneself to meditation by means of that preliminary concentration based on that learning sign. As one does so, an object which is the counterpart of that (learning sign) becomes well established and fixed in the mind—(an object) which is freed of the flaws of the original object, reckoned as a concept, born of meditation. Then it is said that the counterpart sign has arisen.
|
`341
§18 Attainment of Jhana
|9.31
Thereafter, access development is accomplished, consisting in concentration of the sense sphere in which the obstacles have been abandoned. 
|9.32
Following this, as one cultivates the counterpart sign by means of access concentration, one enters the first jhana of the fine-material sphere. 
|9.33
Following this, one masters the first jhana by means of the five kinds of mastery —in adverting, attainment, resolution, emergence, and reviewing. 
Then, by striving to abandon the successive gross factors such as initial application, etc., and to arouse the successive subtle factors, such as sustained application, etc., one enters the second jhana, etc., in due sequence according to one’s ability.
|9.34
Thus the counterpart sign is found in twenty-two meditation subjects —the earth kasina, etc. —but of the remaining (eighteen) subjects, 
|9.35
the illimitables occur with the concept of beings (as their object).
|
`342
Guide to §18
The five kinds of mastery: Of these, mastery in adverting (avajjana-
vasita) is the ability to advert to the different jhana factors such as vitakka,
vicara, etc., quickly and easily in accordance with one’s wish. Mastery
in attainment (samapajjanavasita) is the ability to attain the different
jhanas quickly and easily, without many bhavangas arising in the proc-
ess of their attainment. Mastery in resolution (adhitthanavasita) is the
ability to remain in the jhana for a length of time determined by one’s
prior resolution. Mastery in emergence (vutthanavasita) is the ability to
emerge from the jhanas quickly and easily. And mastery in reviewing
(paccavekkhanavasita) is the ability to review the jhana from which one
has just emerged. Besides these five masteries, the meditator is also
encouraged to develop skill in extending the visualized counterpart sign
by gradually increasing its size until it appears as if encompassing the
entire world.
`343
§19 The Immaterial Attainments
|9.36
Next one withdraws any kasina except the space kasina, and does the preliminary work by contemplating the space that remains as infinite.
By doing so, one enters the first immaterial attainment. 
|9.37
When one does the preliminary work by contemplating the first immaterial-sphere consciousness as infinite, one enters the second immaterial attainment. 
|9.38
When one does the preliminary work by contemplating the absence of the first immaterial-sphere consciousness thus, “There is nothing,” one enters the third immaterial attainment.
|9.39
When one does the preliminary work by contemplating the third immaterial attainment thus, “This is peaceful, this is sublime,” one enters the fourth immaterial attainment.
|
§20 Other Meditation Subjects
|9.40
With the other ten meditation subjects, when one does the preliminary work by taking the virtues of the Buddha, etc., as one’s object, when that sign has been thoroughly acquired, one becomes concentrated upon it by means of preliminary development and access concentration is also accomplished.
|
§21 Direct Knowledge
|9.41
Having emerged from the fifth jhana taken as a basis for direct knowledge, having adverted to the resolution, etc., when one does the preliminary work, one enters into the fifth fine-material-sphere jhana occurring by way of direct knowledge with respect to such objects as visible forms, etc.
|9.42
The direct knowledges are fivefold: the supernormal powers, the divine ear, knowledge of others’ minds, recollection of past lives, and the divine eye.
Herein, this is the analysis of the terrain.
The method of meditation for developing calm is finished.
|
`344
Guide to §21
Having emerged from the fifth jhana, etc.: The Visuddhimagga ex-
plains the procedure for exercising the direct knowledges thus: “(After
accomplishing the preliminaries) he attains jhana as the basis for direct
knowledge and emerges from it. Then if he wants to become a hundred,3
he does the preliminary work thus, ‘Let me become a hundred,, after
which he again attains jhana as the basis for direct knowledge, emerges,
and resolves. He becomes a hundred simultaneously with the resolving
consciousness” (XII,57).
The direct knowledges are fivefold:
(1)	Supernormal powers include the ability to display multiple forms
of one’s body, to appear and vanish at will, to pass through walls un-
hindered, to dive in and out of the earth, to walk on water, to travel
through the air, to touch and stroke the sun and moon, and to exercise
mastery over the body as far as the Brahma-world.
(2)	The divine ear enables one to hear subtle and coarse sounds, both
far and near.
(3)	The knowledge of others, minds is the ability to read the thoughts
of others and to know directly their states of mind.
(4)	The recollection of past lives is the ability to know one’s past births
and to discover various details about those births.
(5)	The divine eye is the capacity for clairvoyance, which enables one
to see heavenly or earthly events, both far or near. Included in the di-
vine eye is the knowledge of the passing away and rebirth of beings
(cutnpapcitanana), that is, direct perception of how beings pass away
and re-arise in accordance with their kamma.
These kinds of direct knowledge are all mundane and are dependent
on mastery over the fifth jhana. The texts also mention a sixth direct
knowledge. This is the knowledge of the destruction of the taints
(cisavakkhayanana), which is supramundane and arises through insight.
Compendium of Insight
(vipassanasangaha)
Basic Categories
§22 Stages of Purification
`345
TABLE 9.2: THE SEVEN STAGES OF PURIFICATION
I.
II.
III.
Purification
Of virtue
Of mind
Of view
IV. By overcoming doubt
V.	By knowledge and vision of path and not path
VI.	By knowledge and vision of the way

Practice
Four kinds of purified virtue Access and absorption concentration Understanding characteristics, etc., of mental and material phenomena Discernment of conditions for mental and material phenomena
1. Knowledge of comprehension
2. Knowledge of rise and fall (tender phase)
Distinguishing wrong path from right path of contemplation
2. Knowledge of rise and fall (mature phase)
3. Knowledge of dissolution
4. Knowledge of fearfulness
5. Knowledge of danger
6. Knowledge of disenchantment
7. Knowledge of desire for deliverance
8. Knowledge of reflection
9. Knowledge of equanimity towards formations
10. Knowledge of conformity
Between VI and VII	
11. Change-of-lineage
VII. By knowledge and Knowledge of four supramundane paths vision

NOTE: The insight knowledges are enumerated in the right-hand column using arabic numbers.
|9.43
In insight meditation, the compendium of purifications is seven-fold: (1) purification of virtue, (2) purification of mind, (3) purification of view, (4) purification by overcoming doubt, (5) purification by knowledge and vision as to what is the path and what is not the
path, (6) purification by knowledge and vision of the way, and (7) purification by knowledge and vision.
|
Guide to §22
These seven stages of purification are to be attained in sequence, each
being the support for the one that follows. The first purification corre-
sponds to the morality aspect of the path, the second to the concentration
`346
aspect, the last five to the wisdom aspect. The first six stages are mun-
dane, the last is the supramundane paths. See Table 9.2.
§23 The Three Characteristics
|9.44
There are three characteristics: the characteristic of impermanence, the characteristic of suffering, and the characteristic of non-self.
|
Guide to §23
The characteristic of impermanence is the mode of rise and fall
and change, that is, reaching non-existence after having come to be.
The characteristic of suffering is the mode of being continuously
oppressed by rise and fall.
The characteristic of non-self is the mode of being insusceptible to
the exercise of mastery, that is, the fact that one cannot exercise com-
plete control over the phenomena of mind and matter.
§24 The Three Contemplations
|9.45
There are three contemplations: the contemplation of impermanence, the contemplation of suffering, and the contemplation of non-self.
|
§25 The Ten Insight Knowledges
|9.46
There are ten kinds of insight knowledge: (1) knowledge of comprehension, (2) knowledge of rise and fall (of formations), (3) knowledge of the dissolution (of formations), (4) knowledge (of dissolving things) as fearful, (5) knowledge of (fearful) things as dangerous, (6) knowledge of disenchantment (with all formations), (7) knowledge of desire for deliverance (8) knowledge of reflecting contemplation, (9) knowledge of equanimity towards formations, and (10) knowledge of conformity.
|
`347
§26 The Three Emancipations
|9.47
There are three emancipations: the void emancipation, the signless emancipation, and the desireless emancipation.
|
§27 The Three Doors to Emancipation
|9.48
There are three doors to emancipation: contemplation of the void, contemplation of the signless, and contemplation of the desireless.
|
Guide to §§26-27
These categories will be explained in the course of the following
exposition.
Analysis of Purification
(visuddhibheda)
§28 Purification of Virtue
|9.49
Purification of virtue consists of the four kinds of purified virtue, namely:
(1) virtue regarding restraint according to the Patimokkha;
(2) virtue regarding restraint of the sense faculties;
(3) virtue consisting in purity of livelihood; and
(4) virtue connected with the use of the requisites.
|
Guide to §28
These four kinds of purified virtue are explained with reference to the life of a bhikkhu, a Buddhist monk.
`348
Virtue regarding restraint according to the Patimokkha: The
Patimokkha is the code of fundamental disciplinary rules binding upon
a Buddhist monk. This code consists of 227 rules of varying degrees of
gravity. Perfect adherence to the rules laid down in the Patimokkha is
called “virtue regarding restraint according to the Patimokkha.”
Virtue regarding restraint of the sense faculties means the exer-
cise of mindfulness in one's encounter with sense objects, not allowing
the mind to come under the sway of attraction towards pleasant objects
and repulsion towards unpleasant objects.
Virtue consisting in purity of livelihood deals with the manner in
which a bhikkhu acquires the necessities of life. He should not acquire
his requisites in a manner unbecoming for a monk, who is dedicated to
purity and honesty.
Virtue connected with the use of the requisites means that the
bhikkhu should use the four requisites —robes, almsfood, lodging, and
medicines—after reflecting upon their proper purpose.
§29 Purification of Mind
|9.50
Purification of mind consists of two kinds of concentration, namely: access concentration and absorption concentration.
|
Guide to §29
The Pali Buddhist tradition recognizes two different approaches to
the development of insight. One approach, called the vehicle of calm
(samathayana), involves the prior development of calm meditation to
the level of access concentration or absorption concentration as a basis
for developing insight. One who adopts this approach, the samathayanika
meditator, first attains access concentration or one of the fine-material
or immaterial-sphere jhanas. Then he turns to the development of in-
sight by defining the mental and physical phenomena occurring in the
jhana as mentality-materiality and seeking their conditions (see §§30-
31), after which he contemplates these factors in terms of the three char-
acteristics (see §32). For this meditator, his prior attainment of access
or absorption concentration is reckoned as his purification of mind.
The other approach, called the vehicle of pure insight {suddha-
vipassanayana), does not employ the development of calm as a founda-
tion for developing insight. Instead the meditator, after purifying his
morality, enters directly into the mindful contemplation of the changing
mental and material processes in his own experience. As this
`349
contemplation gains in strength and precision, the mind becomes
naturally concentrated upon the ever-changing stream of experience with
a degree of concentration equal to that of access concentration. This
moment-by-moment fixing of the mind on the material and mental
processes in their present immediacy is known as momentary concen-
tration {khanikasamadhi). Because it involves a degree of mental
stabilization equal to that of access concentration, this momentary
concentration is reckoned as purification of mind for the vipassanayanika
meditator, the meditator who adopts the vehicle of pure insight. Such a
meditator is also called a “dry insight worker” {sukkhavipassaka) because
he develops insight without the “moisture” of the jhanas.4
§30 Purification of View
|9.51
Purification of view is the discernment of mind and matter with respect to their characteristics, functions, manifestations, and proximate causes.
|
Guide to §30
Purification of view is so called because it helps to purify one of the
wrong view of a permanent self. This purification is arrived at in the
course of meditation by discerning the personality as a compound of
mental and material factors which occur interdependently, without any
controlling self within or behind them. This stage is also called the ana-
lytical knowledge of mind-and-matter (namarUpavavatthananana) be-
cause the mental and material phenomena are distinguished by way of
their characteristics, etc.
§31 Purification by Overcoming Doubt
|9.52
Purification by overcoming doubt is the discernment of the conditions of that same mind and matter.
|
`350
Guide to §31
Purification by overcoming doubt is so called because it develops the knowledge which removes doubts about the conditions for mind-and-matter during the three periods ot time——past, present, and future. It is achieved by applying, during the contemplative process, one’s knowledge of dependent arising in order to understand that the present compound of mind-and-matter has not arisen by chance or through a hypothetical cause such as a creator god or primordial soul, but has come into being from previous ignorance, craving, clinging and kamma. One then applies this same principle to the past and future as well. This stage is also called the knowledge of discerning conditions (paccaya-
pariggahanand).
§32 Purification of Path and Not-Path
|9.53
When he has thus discerned the formations of the three planes together with their conditions, the meditator collects them into groups by way of such categories as the aggregates, etc., divided into the past (present, and tuture).
He next comprehends, with the knowledge of comprehension, those formations in terms of the three characteristics—impermanence in the sense of destruction, suffering in the sense of fearfulness, and non-self in the sense of corelessness—by way of duration, continuity, and moment. Then he contemplates with the knowledge of rise and fall the rising and falling (of those formations) by way of condition and by way of moment.
As he does so, there arise: an aura, zest, tranquillity, resolution, exertion, happiness, knowledge, mindfulness, equanimity, and attachment.
Purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path is the discrimination of the characteristics of what is the path and what is not the path by discerning that those imperfections of insight—the aura, etc. —are obstacles to progress.
|
`351

Guide to §32
Collects them into groups: This shows the preparation for knowl-
edge of comprehension {sammasananana), the phase in the development
of insight wherein the mental and material phenomena are explored in
terms of the three characteristics. The meditator first considers all
materiality —whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross
or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near—as comprised by the
materiality aggregate. Similarly, he considers all feelings, perceptions,
mental formations, and acts of consciousness to be comprised by their
respective aggregates—the feeling aggregate, the perception aggregate,
the formations aggregate, and the consciousness aggregate.
He next comprehends, with the knowledge of comprehension: This
shows the actual ascription of the three characteristics to the formations
collected into the five aggregates. All those formations are character-
ized by “impermanence in the sense of destruction” (khayatthena) be-
cause they undergo destruction exactly where they arise, and do not pass
on to some other state retaining their identity; they are “suffering in the
sense of fearfulness” (bhayatthena) because whatever is impermanent
provides no stable security and thus is to be feared; and they are ^non-
self in the sense of corelessness” (asarakatthena) because they lack any
core of self or substance or any inner controller.
By way of duration, continuity, and moment: “By way of dura-
tion” {addhana) means in terms of an extended period of time. One be-
gins by considering that the formations in each single lifetime are all
impermanent, suffering, and non-self, then one progressively reduces the
periods: to the three stages of a single life, to the ten decades, to each
year, month, fortnight, day, hour, etc., until one recognizes that even in
a single step formations are impermanent, painful, and non-self. (See
Vism. XX, 46-65.) “By way of continuity” (santati) means by way of a
continuous series of similar mental or material phenomena. “By way of
moment” (khana) means by way of momentaiy mental and material phe-
nomena.
The knowledge of rise and fall (udayabbayahana) is the knowledge
in contemplating the arising and cessation of formations. By “rise” is
meant the generation, production, or arising of states; by “fall” is meant
their change, destruction, dissolution. The knowledge of rise and fall is
`352
exercised “by way of condition” {paccayavasena) when one sees how
formations arise through the arising of their conditions and cease through
the cessation of their conditions. It is exercised “by way of moment”
(khanavasena) when one contemplates the actual generation and disso-
lution of the momentary phenomena in the present moment as they arise
and pass away. (See Vism. XX, 93-99.)
As he does so: The knowledge of rise and fall occurs in two phases.
During the first, “tender” knowledge of rise and fall, as the process of
contemplation gains momentum, ten “imperfections of insight”
(vipassan ^upakkilesa) arise in the meditator. He may witness an aura of
light (obhasa) emanating from his body. He experiences unprecedented
zest (plti)y tranquillity {passaddhi), and happiness (sukha). His resolu-
tion (adhimokkha) increases, he makes a great exertion (paggaha), his
knowledge (nana) ripens, his mindful awareness (upatthana) becomes
steady, and he develops unshaken equanimity (upekkha). And underly-
ing these experiences there is a subtle attachment (nikanti)—an enjoy-
ment of these experiences and a clinging to them.
The discrimination of the characteristics of what is the path, etc.:
When such elevated experiences occur to a meditator, if he lacks discrimi-
nation he will give rise to the misconception that he has reached the
supramundane path and fruit. He will then drop his insight meditation
and sit enjoying these experiences, unaware that he is clinging to them.
But if he possesses discrimination, he will recognize these states as mere
natural by-products of maturing insight. He will contemplate them as
impermanent, suffering, and non-self and proceed with his insight con-
templation, without becoming attached to them. This discrimination be-
tween the ten imperfections as not being the path, and the practice of
insight contemplation as being the correct path, is called purification by
knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the path.
§33 Purification of the Way
|9.54
When he is thus free from those obstacles to progress, as he practises he passes through a succession of insights in regard to the three characteristics, beginning with knowledge of rise and fall and culminating in conformity. These nine insight knowledges are called purification by knowledge and vision of the way.
|
`353
Guide to §33
These nine insight knowledges: The nine insight knowledges that constitute purification by knowledge and vision of the way are as follows (see §25):
(1) Knowledge of rise and fall: This is the same knowledge as that which preceded the imperfections of insight, but when the imperfections have been overcome, it now matures and develops with increased strength and clarity.
(2) Knowledge of dissolution (bhangancina): When the meditator’s knowledge becomes keen, he no longer extends his mindfulness to the arising or presence of formations, but brings it to bear only on their cessation, destruction, fall, and breakup. This is knowledge of dissolution.
(3) Knowledge of the fearful (bhayanana): As the meditator contemplates the dissolution of formations in all three periods of time, he recognizes that all such dissolving things in all realms of existence are necessarily fearful.
(4) Knowledge of danger (adlnavafiana): By recognizing that all formations are fearful, the meditator sees them as utterly destitute of any core or any satisfaction and as nothing but danger. He also understands that only in the unconditioned, free from arising and destruction, is there
any security.
(5) Knowledge of disenchantment (nibbidanana): When he sees all formations as danger, he becomes disenchanted with them, and takes no delight in the field of formations belonging to any realm of existence.
(6) Knowledge of desire for deliverance (muncitukamyatanana) is the desire, arisen in the course of contemplation, of being delivered from the whole field of formations and escaping from it.
(7) Knowledge of reflective contemplation (patisankhaiiana): In order to be delivered from the whole field of formations, the meditator again re-examines those same formations, attributing the three characteristics to them in various ways. When he clearly reviews those formations as
marked by the three characteristics, this is knowledge of reflective contemplation.
(8) Knowledge of equanimity towards formations (sankhar’upek-khcinana): After he has passed through the reflective contemplation, the meditator sees nothing in formations to be taken as “I” and “mine,” so he abandons both terror and delight and becomes indifferent and neutral towards all formations. Thus there arises in him knowledge of equanimity towards formations.
(9) Knowledge of conformity (anulomaiiana): This knowledge (also rendered “adaptation”）is the knowledge in the sense-sphere cittas that
`354
arise preceding the change-of-lineage citta in the cognitive process of
the supramundane path (dealt with in the following section). This phase
of insight is called conformity because it conforms to the functions of
truth both in the preceding eight kinds of insight knowledge and in the
path attainment to follow.

§34 Purification by Knowledge and Vision
|9.55
When he thus practises contemplation, owing to the ripening of insight (he feels), “Now the absorption (of the path) will arise.” There-upon, arresting the life-continuum, there arises mind-door adverting, followed by two or three (moments of) insight consciousness having for their object any of the characteristics such as impermanence, etc.
|9.56
They are termed preparation, access, and conformity (moments). That knowledge of equanimity towards formations together with knowledge that conforms (to the truths), when perfected, is also termed “insight leading to emergence.”
|9.57
Thereafter, the change-of-lineage consciousness, having Nibbana as its object, occurs, overcoming the lineage of the worldlings and evolving the lineage of the noble ones. 
|9.58
Immediately after this, the path (of stream-entry), fully understanding the truth of suffering, abadoning the truth of its origin, realizing the truth of its cessation, and developing the truth of the path to its cessation, enters upon the (supramundane) cognitive process of absorption. 
|9.59
After that, two or three moments of fruition consciousness arise and cease. Then there is subsidence into the life-continuum.
Then, arresting the life-continuum, reviewing knowledge occurs.
|9.60
The wise person reviews the path, fruit, Nibbana, and he either reviews or does not review the defilements destroyed and the remaining defilements.
Thus the fourfold path which has to be developed in sequence by means of the sixfold purity is called purification by knowledge and vision.
Herein, this is the section on purification.
|
`355
Guide to §34
There arises mind-door adverting: On the cognitive process of the
path, see IV, §14. Three moments of insight consciousness occur in an
individual with normal faculties, two moments (omitting the moment
of preparation) in one with unusually acute faculties.
Insight leading to emergence (vutthanagaminivipassana): This is
the culminating phase of insight preceding the arising of the supra-
mundane path. The path is called emergence because, objectively, it
emerges from formations and takes Nibbana as object, and because sub-
jectively it emerges from defilements.
The change-of-lineage consciousness (gotrabhiicitta): This citta is
the first advertence to Nibbana and the proximity condition for the
supramundane path. It is called change-of-lineage because it marks the
transition from the “lineage” or family of the worldlings {puthujjana-
gotra) to the lineage or family of the noble ones (ariyagotra). How-
ever, while this knowledge is like the path in that it cognizes Nibbana,
unlike the path it cannot dispel the murk of defilements that conceals
the Four Noble Truths. In the approach to the second and higher paths
this mind-moment is called vodana, cleansing, instead of change-of-
lineage because the practitioner already belongs to the lineage of the
noble ones.
The path: The path consciousness {maggacitta) simultaneously per-
forms four functions, one with respect to each of the four truths. These
four functions, mentioned here, are the full understanding {parinfia) of
of preparation) in one with unusually acute faculties.
Insight leading to emergence (vutthanagaminivipassana): This is
the culminating phase of insight preceding the arising of the supra-
mundane path. The path is called emergence because, objectively, it
emerges from formations and takes Nibbana as object, and because sub-
jectively it emerges from defilements.
The change-of-lineage consciousness (gotrabhiicitta): This citta is
the first advertence to Nibbana and the proximity condition for the
supramundane path. It is called change-of-lineage because it marks the
transition from the “lineage” or family of the worldlings {puthujjana-
gotra) to the lineage or family of the noble ones (ariyagotra). How-
ever, while this knowledge is like the path in that it cognizes Nibbana,
unlike the path it cannot dispel the murk of defilements that conceals
the Four Noble Truths. In the approach to the second and higher paths
this mind-moment is called vodana, cleansing, instead of change-of-
lineage because the practitioner already belongs to the lineage of the
noble ones.
The path: The path consciousness {maggacitta) simultaneously per-
forms four functions, one with respect to each of the four truths. These
four functions, mentioned here, are the full understanding {parinfia) of
`356
suffering; the abandoning (pahana) of craving, its origin; the realiza-
tion (sacchikiriya) of Nibbana, its cessation; and the development
{bhavana) of the Noble Eightfold Path. For one of sharp faculties who
has skipped the preparatory moment three fruition cittas occur follow-
ing the path; for others, who have gone through the preparatory moment,
two fruition cittas occur.
Reviewing knowledge {paccavekkhananana): After each of the four
supramundane path attainments, the disciple reviews the path, fruition,
and Nibbana; usually, but not invariably, he reviews as well the defile-
ments abandoned and the defilements remaining. Thus there are a maxi-
mum of nineteen kinds of reviewing knowledge: five each for each of
the first three paths, and four for the final path. This is because an
Arahant, who is fully liberated, has no more defilements remaining to
be reviewed.
Analysis of Emancipation
(vimokkhabheda)
§35 The Three Doors to Emancipation
|9.61
Therein, the contemplation of non-self, which discards the clinging to a self, becomes the door to emancipation termed contemplation of the void.
|9.62
The contemplation of impermanence, which discards the sign of perversion, becomes the door to emancipation termed contemplation of the signless.
|9.63
The contemplation of suffering, which discards desire through craving, becomes the door to emancipation termed contemplation of the desireless.
|
Guide to §35
When insight reaches its culmination, it settles upon one of the three
contemplations—of impermanence, or suffering, or non-self—as
determined by the inclination of the meditator. According to the
Commentaries, one in whom faith is the dominant faculty settles upon
the contemplation of impermanence; one in whom concentration is the
dominant faculty settles upon the contemplation of suffering; and one
in whom wisdom is the dominant faculty settles upon the contemplation
`357
of non-self. This final phase of contemplation, being the meditator’s
immediate access to the emancipating experience of the supramundane
path, is thus called his “door to emancipation” (vimokkhamukha). Here,
it is the noble path that is called emancipation, and the contemplation
leading to the path that is called the door to emancipation.
The contemplation of non-self is termed contemplation of the void
because it sees formations as being void of a self, a living being, a per-
son. The contemplation of impermanence is termed contemplation of the
signless because it abandons “the sign of perversion” (vipallasanimitta),
that is, the deceptive appearance of permanence, stability, and durabil-
ity which lingers over formations owing to the perversion of perception.
And the contemplation of suffering is termed contemplation of theQ
desireless because it terminates desire by abandoning the false percep-
tion of pleasure in formations.
§36 Emancipation in the Path and Fruit
|9.64
Hence, if with the insight leading to emergence one contemplates on non-self, then the path is known as the void emancipation; 
|9.65
if one contemplates on impermanence, then the path is known as the signless emancipation; 
|9.66
if one contemplates on suffering, then the path is known as the desireless emancipation. Thus the path receives three names according to the way of insight.
Likewise, the fruit (occurring) in the cognitive process of the path receives these three names according to the way of the path.
|
Guide to §36
When the meditator attains the path through the contemplation of non-self, the path makes Nibbana its object through the aspect of voidness as devoid of self and it is thus known as the void emancipation. When he attains the path through the contemplation of impermanence, the path makes Nibbana its object through the signless aspect—as devoid of the sign of formations—and it is thus known as the signless emancipation.
When he attains the path through the contemplation of suffering, the pathmakes Nibbana its object through the desireless aspect—as being free
`358
from the desire of craving —and it is thus known as the desireless eman-
cipation. The fruit too receives the same designation as the path that
preceded it.
§37 Emancipation in Fruition Attainment
|9.67
However, in the cognitive process of the attainment of fruition, to those who contemplate in the foregoing manner, the fruits that arise respectively in each case are termed the void emancipation, etc., only in accordance with the way of insight. But as regards objects and respective qualities, the three names are applied equally to all (paths and fruits) everywhere.
Herein, this is the analysis of emancipation.
|
Guide to §37
When a noble disciple enters his respective fruition attainment, the
fruition experience is named after the type of insight that led immediately
to its attainment, not after the original path attainment in the cognitive
process of the path. That is, if he enters the fruition attainment by the
contemplation of non-self, the fruition is called the void emancipation;
if by the contemplation of impermanence, the signless emancipation; and
if by the contemplation of suffering, the desireless emancipation. But
loosely speaking all paths and fruits can receive all three names because
they all take as object Nibbana —which is signless, desireless, and void —
and they all share the qualities of being signless, desireless, and void.
Analysis of Individuals
[puggalabheda)
`359
§38 The Stream-Enterer
|9.68
Herein, having developed the path of stream-entry, by abandoning wrong views and doubt one becomes a stream-enterer, one who has escaped from rebirth in woeful states and will be reborn at most seven more times.
|
Guide to §38
A stream-enterer is one who has entered the stream that leads irre-
versibly to Nibbana, that is, the Noble Eightfold Path. A stream-enterer
has cut off the coarsest three fetters—personality view, doubt, and ad-
herence to rules and rituals; he has unshakable confidence in the Bud-
dha, Dhamma, and Sangha; and he is free from the prospect of rebirth
in any of the woeful realms. Of the four taints (asava), he has elimi-
nated the taint of wrong views, and of the fourteen unwholesome
cetasikas he has eliminated wrong view and doubt, and according to the
Commentaries, also envy and avarice. He has freed himself as well from
all degrees of defilements strong enough to lead to rebirth in the woe-
ful planes. His conduct is marked by scrupulous observance of the Five
Precepts: abstinence from taking life, stealing, sexual misconduct, false
speech, and use of intoxicants.
There are three types of stream-enterer:
(1) One who will be reborn seven times at most in the human and celestial worlds (sattakkhattuparama).
(2) One who takes birth in good families two or three times before attaining Arahantship (kolankola).
(3)	One who will be reborn only once more before attaining the goal (ekablji).
§39 The Once-Returner
|9.69
Having developed the path of once-returning, with the attenuation of lust, hatred, and delusion, one becomes a once-returner, one who returns to this world only one more time.
|
Guide to §39
The once-returner has eliminated the grosser forms of lust, hate, and delusion. Thus, although attenuated forms of these defilements can still arise in him, they do not occur often and their obsessive force is weak.
`361
Ledi Sayadaw points out that the Commentaries offer two conflicting interpretations of the expression “this world” (imam lokam), to which the once-returner may return one more time. On one interpretation it is the human world, to which he may return from a heavenly world; on the other it is the sense-sphere world, to which he may return from a Brahma-world. Ledi Sayadaw maintains that in spite of commentarial support for the former interpretation, the second seems better supported by the canonical texts.
According to the commentary to the Puggalapannatti there are five kinds of once-returner:
(1) One attains the fruit of once-returning in the human world, takes rebirth in the human world, and attains final Nibbana here.
(2) One attains the fruit of once-returning in the human world, takes rebirth in a heavenly world, and attains final Nibbana there.
(3) One attains the fruit in a heavenly world, takes rebirth in a heavenly world, and attains final Nibbana there.
(4) One attains the fruit in a heavenly world, takes rebirth in the human world, and attains final Nibbana here.
(5) One attains the fruit in the human world, takes rebirth in a heavenly world and passes the full life-span there, and then takes rebirth again in the human world, where one attains final Nibbana.
It should be noted that whereas the ekabJjJ stream-enterer has only one more rebirth, the fifth type of once-returner has two. Nevertheless,
he is still called “once-returner” because he returns only once more to the human world.
§40 The Non-Returner
|6.70
Having developed the path of non-returning, by totally abandoning sensual lust and ill will, one becomes a non-returner, one who does not return to this (sensuous) state.
|
Guide to §40
A non-returner has fully eradicated sensual lust and ill will, the fetters that bind to the sensuous world. He has also eradicated the taint of sensual desire and the unwholesome cetasikas, hatred and worry, as well as all greed taking a sensuous object. Thus he will be spontaneously reborn in a fine-material realm and there attain final Nibbana. It should be noted that while only non-returners are reborn in the Pure Abodes,
`362
there is no fixed determination that all non-returners are reborn there.
The texts mention five types of non-returner:
(1) One who, having been reborn spontaneously in a higher world, generates the final path before he has reached the midpoint of the life-span (an tara-parin ibbayl).
(2) One who generates the final path after passing the midpoint of the life-span, even when on the verge of death (upahacca-parinibbayl).
(3) One who attains the final path without exertion {asankhara pcirinibbayi).
(4) One who attains the final path with exertion (sasankhara-parinibbayl).
(5) One who passes from one higher realm to another until he reaches the Akanittha realm, the Highest Pure Abode, and there attains the final path {uddhamsoto akanitthagamT).
§41 The Arahant
|9.71
Having developed the path of Arahantship, with the total abandonment of defilements one becomes an Arahant, a destroyer of the taints, a supreme recipient of offerings in the world.
Herein, this is the analysis of individuals.
|
Guide to §41
The five fetters abandoned by the first three paths are called the lower
fetters (orambhagiya-samyojana) because they bind beings to the lower
world, the sensuous plane of existence. One who has eradicated them,
the non-returner, no longer returns to the sensuous plane, but he is still
bound to the round of existence by the five higher fetters (uddham-
bhcigiya-samyojana). With the attainment of the path of Arahantship,
these five higher fetters are also eradicated: desire for fine-material
existence, desire for immaterial existence, conceit, restlesness, and
ignorance. The fourth path also destroys the remaining two taints —the
taint of attachment to existence and the taint of ignorance —for which
reason the Arahant is called a “destroyer of the taints” (khlnasava). The
path of Arahantship eradicates, too, the remaining unwholesome cetasikas
left unabandoned by the earlier paths: delusion, shamelessness, fearless-
ness of wrongdoing, restlessness, conceit, sloth, and torpor.
`363
Analysis of Attainments
[samapattibheda)
§42 Accessibility
|9.72
Herein, the attainment of fruition is common to all, each being able to attain their respective fruition. 
|
Guide to §42
The attainment of fruition {phalasamapatti) is a meditative attainment by which a noble disciple enters into supramundane absorption with Nibbana as object. It is attained for the purpose of experiencing the bliss of Nibbana here and now. The cittas that occur in this attainment are the fruition cittas corresponding to the disciple’s level of realization. Thus each of the four grades of noble individuals can enter their own proper fruition attainment —the stream-enterer attaining the fruition attainment of stream-entry, etc. The attainment is reached by first making the resolution to attain fruition and then developing in sequence the insight knowledges beginning with knowledge of rise and fall. (See Vism. XXIII, 6-15.)

§43 The Attainment of Cessation
|9.73
But the attainment of cessation is accessible only to non-returners and Arahants.
In this case, one enters successively upon the sublime attainments beginning with the first jhana, and then after emerging from them, one contemplates with insight the conditioned states within each of those attainments.
Having proceeded thus up to the base of nothingness, one then attends to the preliminary duties such as the resolution, etc., and enters the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. After two occasions of javana in absorption, the continuum of consciousness is suspended. Then one is said to have attained cessation.
|
`364
Guide to §43
The attainment of cessation is a meditative attainment in which the stream
of consciousness and mental factors is completely cut off temporarily. It can be
obtained only by non-returners and Arahants who have mastery over all the
fine-material and immaterial jhanas. Further, it can be obtained only within the
sensuous plane or the fine-material plane of existence. It cannot be obtained
within the immaterial plane, for there is no attaining of the four fine-material
jhanas there, which are the prerequisites for entering cessation.
To enter cessation the meditator must attain each jhana in proper se-
quence. After emerging from each one, he contemplates its factors as im-
permanent, suffering, and non-self. In this manner the procedure is carried
as far as the base of nothingness. After emerging from the base of noth-
ingness the meditator then makes four resolutions: (1) that any requisites
he has belonging to others should not be destroyed during the attainment
(his own requisites are automatically protected by the attainment itself)；
(2)	that he should emerge if his services are needed by the Sangha;
(3)	that he should emerge if he is summoned by the Buddha (during the
Buddha's lifetime); and (4) that he is not bound to die within seven days.
After making these resolutions, he enters the fourth immaterial jhana,
which occurs for two moments of javana. Immediately after, he attains
cessation, wherein the stream of consciousness is temporarily suspended.

§44 Emergence from Cessation
|9.74
At the time of emergence (from cessation), in the case of a non-returner the fruit of non-returning consciousness occurs one time—in the case of an Arahant, the fruit of Arahantship consciousness (occurs one time) —and then there is subsidence into the life-continuum. Following this, reviewing knowledge occurs.
Herein, this is the analysis of attainments.
The method of meditation
for developing insight is finished.
|
`365
§45 Conclusion
|9.75
One who aspires to enjoy the taste Of practice in the Buddha's Dispensation Should develop this twofold meditation So excellent in the way explained.
Thus ends the ninth chapter
in the Manual of Abhidhamma entitled
the Compendium of Meditation Subjects.
|
Guide to §45
The “twofold meditation” is calm and insight.
|9.76
COLOPHON
This treatise—composed out of compassion for others at the request of Namba, a person of refined manners, belonging to a respectable family, full of faith, and replete with sterling virtues —has been completed.
By this great merit may the modest monks, who are purified by wisdom and who shine with virtues, remember till the end of the world the most famous Mnlasoma Monastery, the fortunate abode, for the acquisition of merit and for their happiness.
Thus ends the treatise called
the Manual of Abhidhamma composed
by Acariya Anuruddha.
|
`366
Guide to Colophon
The teachers of Abhidhamma hold two different opinions about the name of the monastery where Acariya Anuruddha composed the Abhidhammattha Sangaha. One school of thought takes the name to be TumOlasoma Vihara, holding tumiila to be synonymous with maha, meaning great. No such word as tumiila, however, exists in Pali or Sanskrit. Both languages contain a word tumula, which does not mean great but uproar or “tumult, ” a word to which it is etymologically related. This word is generally used in connection with warfare; it occurs in the Vessantara Jataka in the line, Ath, ettha vattatl saddo tumulo bheravo maha: “Then sounded forth a mighty sound, a terrible great tumult” (Mahanipata, v.1809; PTS ed. vi, 504).
The other line of interpretation holds that the name of the monastery is Mulasoma Vihara. The syllable tu is taken to be an indeclinable conjunctive particle here used for the sake of euphony. Since Acariya Anuruddha has used tu in a similar way elsewhere in his treatise (see I, §32; VIII, §12), it seems probable that he is using it here as well. Thus we should regard the name of the monastery as the Mulasoma Vihara.
In the Sri Lankan tradition it is generally believed that this monastery was situated in the district of Chilaw and that at present the Munnessaram Kovil stands on its site.1
The phrase dhannadhivasa, which the author uses to describe this monastery, does not mean “the abode of grain,” as earlier translations have rendered it. The word dhaiifia here bears the derivative meaning of fortunate or meritorious. Ledi Sayadaw explains that the monastery is so described because it was the residence of meritorious elders beginning with its founder, an elder named Mahinda.




`369
NOTES
Introduction
1.	Asl. 2; Expos” p. 3.
2.	Asl. 2-3; Expos” pp. 3-4.
3.	The Dhammasanganl also includes a Suttanta matrix consisting of forty-
two dyads taken from the Suttas. However, this is ancillary to the Abhi-
dhamma proper and serves more as an appendix for providing succinct
definitions of key Suttanta terms. Moreover, the definitions themselves are
not framed in terms of Abhidhamma categories and the Suttanta matrix is
not employed in any subsequent books of the Abhidhamma Pitaka.
4.	See, for example, the following: A.K. Warder, Indian Buddhism, 2nd rev.
ed. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1980), pp. 218-24; Fumimaro Watanabe,
Philosophy and its Development in the Nikayas and Abhidhamma (Delhi:
Motilal Banarsidass, 1983), pp. 18-67; and the article “Abhidharma Litera-
ture” by Kogen Mizuno in Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fasc. 1 (Govt, of
Ceylon, 1961).
5.	Asl. 410; Expos” p. 519.
6.	Asl. 13; Expos” p. 16-17.
7.	Asl. 16; Expos., p. 20.
8.	The first book of the Sarvastivadin Abhidharma, the Sangltiparyciya, is
ascribed to Sariputta by Chinese sources (but not by Sanskrit and Tibetan
sources), while the second book, the Dharmaskandha, is ascribed to him by
Sanskrit and Tibetan sources (but not by Chinese sources). The Chinese
canon also contains a work entitled the Shariputra Abhidharma-Shastra,
the school of which is not known.
9.	These are reduced to the familar eighty-nine cittas by grouping together the
five cittas into which each path and fruition consciousness is divided by
association with each of the five jhanas.
10.	The Yamaka, in its chapter “Citta-yamaka,” uses the term khana to refer to
the subdivisions of a moment and also introduces the uppada-khana and
bhanga-khana, the sub-moments of arising and dissolution. However, the
threefold scheme of sub-moments seems to appear first in the Abhidhamma
Commentaries.
11.	Ven. A. Devananda Adhikarana Nayaka Thero, in Preface to Paramattha-
vinicchaya and Paramattha-vibhavinT-vyakhya (Colombo: Vidya Sagara
Press, 1926), p. iii.
`370
12.	G.P. Malalasekera, The Pali Literature of Ceylon (Colombo: M.D. Guna-
sena, repr. 1958), pp. 168-70. Malalasekera points out that James Gray, in
his edition of the Buddhagfwsuppatti, gives a chronological list of saintly
and learned men of Southern India, taken from the Talaing records, and
there we find Anuruddha mentioned after authors who are supposed to have
lived later than the seventh or eighth century. Since Bhadanta Sariputta
Mahasami compiled a Sinhala paraphrase of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha
during the reign of Parakrama-Bahu the Great (1164-97), this places
Anuruddha earlier than the middle of the twelfth century.
13.	See the article “Anuruddha (.5)” in Encyclopaedia of Buddhism, Fasc. 4
(Govt, of Ceylon, 1965). Ven. Buddhadatta’s view is also accepted by
Warder, Indian Buddhism, pp. 533-34.
14.	This author is commonly confused with another Burmese monk called
Chapada who came to Sri Lanka during the twelfth century and studied
under Bhadanta Sariputta. The case for two Chapadas is cogently argued by
Ven. A.P. Buddhadatta, Corrections of Geiger’s Mahavamsa, Etc.
(Ambalangoda: Ananda Book Co., 1957), pp. 198-209.
Chapter I
1.	Paramassa uttamassa nanassa attho gocara Vibhv.
2.	According to Vibhv. ditthigata denotes just wrong view, the suffix gata
having no particular meaning here.
3.	(i) Vici (vicinan to) = inquiring + kicch, to be vexed; (ii) vi = devoid of +
cikiccha = remedy.
4.	Sometimes also called rupajjhanas, “fine-material absorptions,” to distin-
guish them from the arupajjhanas which follow.
5.	Aramman 'upanijjhanato paccanlkajjhapanato jhanatn. Vism. IV, 119.
6.	So hi arammane cittam ciropeti. Asl. 114.
7.	Vism. IV, 89-91.
8.	In The Path of Purification, his translation of the Visuddhimagga, Bhikkhu
Nanamoli has translated it as happiness. This rendering is often used for
sukha, the next factor, and thus may lead to a confusion of the two.
9.	Vism. IV,94-100.
10.	For a detailed elaboration of this simile, see Asl. 117-18; Expos., pp. 155-
56.
11.	This qualification is made in regard to the path of once-returning; see p. 67.
12.	For details, see Henepola Gunaratana, The Jhanas in Theravada Buddhist
Meditation (BPS Wheel No. 351/353, 1988), pp. 60-62.
Chapter II
1. Asl. 67; Expos” p. 90.
2.	Kayavinnatti, vaclvinnatti. See VI, §3.
3.	On the bases, see III, §§20-22.
4.	See above, p. 29.
5.	The following explanations of the characteristics, etc., of the different
cetasikas have been collected from Vism. IV, 88-100; IX, 93-96; XIV, 134-
77; and Asl. 107-33, 247-60. See Expos” pp. 142-80, 330-46.
6.	So say the Commentaries, but it seems that tranquillity as proximate cause
applies solely to the pleasant feeling arisen when developing concentration.
A more general proximate cause for feeling would be contact, in accord-
ance with the principle “with contact as condition, feeling comes to be”
(phassapaccaya vedana). In fact, the entire treatment of feeling here is
limited to a particular kind of feeling. For a fuller treatment of feeling in all
its variety, see III, §§2-4, and Guide.
7.	Again, these last two commentarial statements seem fitting only for one-
pointedness that has reached the level of profound concentration.
8.	See above, pp. 56-57.
9.	Or: the mounting of the mind onto the object (arammane cittassa abh ini-
ropana).
10.	Or: continued stroking of the object (aramman 'anumajjana).
11.	In the Suttas chanda is often used as a synonym for lobha and raga, thus
as meaning desire in the reprehensible sense as well. But the Suttas also
recognize chanda as a potentially beneficial factor, as when they speak
about the arousing ot desire tor the abandoning ot unwholesome states and
for the acquisition of wholesome states. See for example the definition of
right effort at D.22/ii,312 (= M.141/iii, 251-52).
12.	As these two factors are the opposites of shame and fear of wrongdoing,
their meaning can be more fully understood by contrast with these beautiful
cetasikas. See below, p. 86.
13.	Since seeing the noble ones leads to hearing the true Dhamma, which can
prevent wrong view from getting a grip on the mind.
14.	Ketukamyata, lit. a desire to fly the banner (to advertise oneself).
15.	Because conceit arises only in greed-rooted cittas dissociated from views.
16.	For the nine grounds for annoyance (or causes of malice, aghatavatthu), see
D.33/iii, 262.
17.	The complete version of these similes is found in the Milindapanha, cited
at Asl. 119-20. See Expos., pp. 157-58.
18.	Apilapana, also rendered “not wobbling.” The commentators explain that
sati keeps the mind as steady as a stone instead of letting it bob about like
a pumpkin in water.
19.	Asl. 103-104; Expos., pp. 136-37.
`372
20.	It should be noted that while compassion involves empathy with those beset
by suffering, it is never accompanied by sadness or sorrow, which is a
feeling pertaining only to unwholesome cittas.
21.	While non-hatred and mental neutrality are found in the supramundane
cittas, they do not occur there as the illimitables of loving-kindness and
equanimity towards beings.
Chapter III
1.	Tranquillity (passaddhi), it seems, is the proximate cause only for the joyful
feeling that arises in meditative development.
2.	On the heart-base, see below §20.
3.	These definitions of the five feelings are found at Vism.XIV,128.
4.	Asl. 263; Expos., pp. 349-50.The five types of sensitivity are considered
species of derived matter, as are the first four sense objects. The tangible
object, however, consists of three primary elements. See VI, §3.
5.	See the explanation of javana in §8 below. Mental pleasure does precede
the javana phase in the joyful investigating consciousness that arises in the
case of an exceptionally pleasant object, but this too follows the bare sense
consciousness.
6.	Suppatitthitabhavasadhanasankhato mulabhavo. Vibhv.
7.	Vism. XVII, 70.
8.	That is, in a five-door process. In a mind-door process the javana phase
follows the mind-door adverting consciousness.
9.	This is so in the case of non-Arahants. For Arahants the javanas are ethically
indeterminate. Javana is treated more fully in Chapter IV.
10.	That is, the four cittas rooted in greed and accompanied by wrong view and
the citta accompanied by doubt will be absent in the stream-enterer and
once-retumer, while the two cittas rooted in hatred will be absent in the non-
returner.
11.	The word rupa has two primary meanings: (1) matter, or materiality; and
(2) visible form. The former is a generic category within which the latter is
included as a species.
12.	The distinction between primary matter and derived matter will be dealt
with more fully at VI, §2.
13.	See Vism. VIII, 111.
Chapter IV
1. For the mind-door process the heart-base is only required in those realms
where matter is found. While a mind-door process can also take any of the
five sense data as object, mental object is listed to show its distinctive
datum.
`373
2.	An exception, however, is made for bodily and verbal intimation and for the
four material characteristics (see VI, §4). The two types of intimation have
the temporal duration of one mind-moment. Of the four characteristics,
production and continuity are equal in duration to the arising moment,
impermanence to the dissolution moment, and decay to forty-nine sub-
moments of mind.
3.	The simile is introduced in Asl. 271-72, Expos., pp. 359-60, however
without continuation beyond the eating of the mango. Later tradition (as in
Vibhv.) adds the swallowing of the fruit and going back to sleep as
counterparts of registration and the lapse back into the bhavanga.
4.	See Vism. XXII, 23, note 7.
5.	Smv. 10-11. Dispeller of Delusion, 1:10-11.
6.	From this stipulation it seems that if aversion arises towards an extremely
desirable object, the registration cittas will not be accompanied by joy (as
stated in §17); instead they will be wholesome-resultants accompanied by
equanimity.
Chapter V
1. Though the logic of the temporal sequence seems to imply that in the case
of the Brahma realms, too, the maha kappa is intended, the commentators
base their interpretation upon another tradition (derived from the Suttas)
which holds that the periodic destruction of the world by fire extends
through the realm of Maha Brahmas. Since this destruction takes place at
the end of one asankheyyakappa within the malmkappa, the conclusion
follows that the Maha Brahmas cannot live longer than a single
asankheyyakappa. The sources for this other tradition are D.1/i,17-18 and
D.27/iii,84-85.
2.	For a detailed analysis of the ten courses of action, see Asl. 97-102; Expos.,
pp. 128-35.
3.	These three views are found at D.2, M.60, M.76, and elsewhere. For the
commentarial analysis, see Bhikkhu Bodhi, The Discourse on the Fruits of
Recluseship (BPS 1989), pp. 69-83.
4.	See Asl. 267-88; Expos” pp. 354-79.
CHAPTER VI
1.	According to the Mahaniddesa: ruppati, kuppati, ghattlyati, pJlJyati, bhij-
jati.
2.	SJtonhadi-virodhippaccayehi vikaram apajjati apadiyati. Vibhv.
3.	This explanation of the characteristics, etc., of the great essentials is taken
from Vism. XI, 93 and 109.
4.	A detailed exposition of derived matter is found at Vism. XIV, 36-70, on
which the account given here is based.
`374
5. Here the prefix sa, “with,” does not imply association (sampayutta) but the
ability to be made an object of the taints.
Chapter VII
1.	The Brahmajala Sutta (D.l) enumerates 62 species of wrong views con-
cerning the nature of the self and the world. These all fall into the two
extreme views of etemalism, which affirms their eternal existence, and
annihilationism, which posits their eventual destruction.
2.	For a detailed account, see Ledi Sayadaw, The Requisites of Enlightenment
(BPS Wheel No. 171/174, 1971).
3.	For the sutta and its commentaries, see Soma Thera, The Way of Mind-
fulness (Kandy: BPS, 1981). The best modern expositions are Nyanaponika
Thera, The Heart of Buddhist Meditation (London: Rider, 1962), and U
Silananda, The Four Foundation of Mindfulness (Boston: Wisdom, 1990).
4.	The explanation given here is derived from Ledi Sayadaw. The view
expressed by Ven. Narada in the previous editions of the Manual, that the
iddhi pada s are solely supramundane, appears to be mistaken.
5.	For a detailed analysis of the aggregates, see Vism. XIV.
6.	The sense bases and elements are dealt with in detail in Vism. XV.
7.	The Four Noble Truths are explained in detail in Vism. XVI.
Chapter VIII
1.	The explanations to follow are based on Vism. XVII and Smv. VI.
2.	The sources for these explanations are: Vism. XVII, 66-100; U Narada,
Guide to Conditional Relations, 1:8-79; and Ledi Sayadaw, The Buddhist
Philosophy of Relations, pp. 1-57.
3.	One line of Abhidhamma interpretation adopted by the teachers would
restrict the base-object-prenascence support condition to the heart-base
arisen at the seventeenth mind-moment preceding the death consciousness,
on an occasion when the last javana process takes the heart-base as object.
Ledi Sayadaw argues at length in the ParamatthadJpan 1 against this narrow
interpretation, and his position is accepted here.
4.	Ledi Sayadaw, Buddhist Philosophy of Relations, pp. 50-51.
5.	Asl. 392; Expos., p. 501. There is a word-play here that cannot be
reproduced in English: the word nama, “name” or “mind,” is derived from
a verbal root nam meaning “to bend.”
6.	For more on the developed theory of concepts in the Abhidhamma, see
Vism. VIII, note 11.
Chapter IX
1.	Asl. 144; Expos., p. 191.
2.	See The Mirror of the Dhamma (BPS Wheel No. 54 A/B, 1984). pp. 5-8.
3.	That is, to exercise the supernormal power of manifesting a hundred
replicas of one’s physical body.
4.	For a fuller discussion of the differences between the samathayana and
vipassanayana approaches, see Gunaratana, The Jhanas, pp. 51-55.
Colophon
1. Ven. A. Devananda Adhikarana Nayaka Thero, in Preface to Paramattha-
vinicchaya, p. ii. Some scholars identify the Mnlasoma Vihara with a
monastery mentioned in the Mahavamsa (xxxm, 84) that was built by King
Vattagamani (88-76 B.C.) for his queen Soma. The monastery is referred
to thus: “When he had sent for Somadevi he raised her again to her rank and
built, in her honour, the Somarama, bearing her name.” The translator,
Geiger, has a note to this verse stating that the monastery must be sought
for near the Abhayagiri Vihara, perhaps in the place of the building
popularly called “the Queen’s Pavilion.” Ven. Saddhatissa, however, in his
introduction to his edition of the Abhidhammattha Sangaha (p. xvi), states
that stone inscriptions dating back to the tenth century record that the
Mulasoma Vihara was built by King Vattagamani and his minister Mola at
Polonnaruwa, in honour of Somadevi the queen. Ven. Saddhatissa also
mentions the popular Sri Lankan tradition which holds that the Munnessaram
Hindu temple was the original Mulasoma Vihara where Anuruddha used to
reside.


APPENDIX I
TEXTUAL SOURCES FOR THE 89
AND 121 CITTAS
90-91	336
■’	339-40
"	340
341
Greed-rooted
Hatred-rooted
stM
1 2
413
421
92
341-44
344
Delusion-rooted
stnd
1 2
422
427
93
344-45
346
Dhs.	Vism.	Asl.
Unwholesome Cittas—12
59Q23902
69^00^-11
3 3444444
s C r tl
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Rootless Cittas—18
Unwholesome-resultant
Eye-consciousness
Ear-consciousness, etc.
Receiving
Investigating
Wholesome-resultant
Eye-consciousness
Ear-consciousness, etc.
Receiving
Investigating (joy)
Investigating (equanimity)
Functional
Five-door adverting
Mind-door adverting
Smile-producing
385-86
388
386-88
101	384-85
96	348-49
"	349-50
97	350
97-98	351-52
97-98	351-52
07
08
08
`377
Sense-Sphere Beautiful—24
Wholesome	1st
t«	2nd
”	3rd
»•	4th
»•	5th
t«	6th
»•	7th
ft	8th
Resultant	lst-8th
Functional	lst-8th
Fine-material	Sphere—15
Wholesome	1st jhana
”	2nd jhana
"	3rd jhana
"	4th jhana
t«	5th jhana
Resultant	1 st jhana
t«	2nd-5th jhana
Functional	1st jhana
ft	2nd-5th jhana
83-85	141-207
"	207
" 208
100	353-79
109	388
160.167	86	216-25
161.168	_•	239-43
163,170	"	225
165,172	"	228-34
174	"	235-39
499	103	379-80
500	"	"
577	109	388-89
578	"	"
Immaterial Sphere—12
Wholesome
Resultant
Functional
Supramundane—8
Wholesome
Stream-entry path
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
or 40
1st jhana
87
109
88
270
275
276
277-83
379-80
388-89
289-319
307-10
`378
Vism.
88
VI
ft
105
105
o o 9
L 1 2 o 2
As07-19-p^
3 3 3
380-84
380-84
Stream-entry path 2nd-5th jhana
Once-retum path
Non-return path
Arahant path
Resultant
Stream-entry fruit
1st jhana
"	2nd-5th jhana
Higher three fruits
NOTE: References to the Dhammasanganl are by paragraph number; to the
Visuddhimagga, by paragraph number of Chapter XIV in The Path of
Purification-, to the Atthasalinl, by page number of The Expositor.


APPENDIX II
TEXTUAL SOURCES FOR THE
52 MENTAL FACTORS
Contact	2 134
Feeling	3	125-28
Perception	4	129-30
Volition	5 135
One-pointedness	11 139
Life faculty	19 138
Attention	... 152
Occasionals6
(8)	Initial application
(9)	Sustained application
(10)	Decision
(11)	Energy
(12)	Zest

akusala—unwholesome
anga—factor
ajjhatta—internal
ajjhattika —internal
annamanna—mutuality (condition)
annasamana—ethically variable
(mental factor)
annatavindriya—faculty of one who
has final knowledge
annindriya—faculty of final knowl-
edge
ati-ittha—extremely desirable
atiparitta —very slight (object)
atimahanta —very great (object)
atlta—past
attavada—doctrine of self
atthapannatti—concept-as-meaning
atthi—presence (condition)
adukkhamasukha—neither-painful-
nor-pleasant (feeling)
adosa —non-hatred
addha—period (of time)
anittha—undesirable
anipphanna—non-concretely pro-
duced (matter)
animitta—signless
aniyatayogl—unfixed adjunct
anupassana—contemplation
anupadisesa—without residue re-
maining (Nibbana element)
anuloma—conformity
anusaya—latent disposition
anussati—recollection
anottappa—fearlessness of wrong-
doing
aparapariyavedamya—indefinitely
effective (kamma)
apayabhumi—woeful plane
appatigharupa—non-impinging
matter
appanihita—desireless
appana—absorption
appamanna—illimitable
abyakata —(kammically) indetermi-
addha—period (of time)
addhana—duration
adhitthana—(1) locus, foundation;
(2) resolution
adhipati—predominant; predomin-
ance (condition)
adhimokkha—decision
anannatannassamltindriya—faculty
“I will know the unknown”
anatta—non-self
anantara—proximity (condition)
anagata—future
anagam!_non-returner
anicca—impermanent
aniccata—impermanence
abyakata—(kammically) indetermi
nate
abhijjha—covetousness
abhinna—direct knowledge
amoha—non-delusion
arahatta—Arahantship
arahant —Arahant (liberated one)
ariya—noble, noble one
ariyasacca —noble truth
aru pa—immaterial
arupavacara—immaterial sphere
alobha—non-greed
avacara—sphere
avigata—non-disappearance (condi
tion)
avijja—ignorance
avinibbhogarupa—inseparable mate-
rial phenomena
avibhuta—obscure (object)
asankhata—unconditioned
asankharika—unprompted (con-
sciousness)
asannasatta—non-percipient being
asaraka—coreless
asubha—foulness
asura—asura (“titan”）
asekkha—one beyond training (i.e.
an Arahant)
ahirika—shamelessness
ahetuka—rootless
ahosi—defunct (kamma)
akara—mode
akasa—space
akasanancayatana—base of infinite
space
akincannayatana—base of nothing-
ness
iddhipada—means to accomplishment
iddhividha—supernormal powers
indriya—faculty
iriyapatha—bodily posture
issa—envy
ukkattha—superior (kamma)
uggaha—learning (sign)
ujjukata —rectitude
utu —temperature
udayabbaya—rise and fall
uddhacca—restlessness
upakkilesa —imperfection (of in-
sight)
upaghataka—destructive (kamma)
upacaya—production
upacara—access
upacchedaka—destructive (kamma)
upatthana—awareness
upatthambaka—supportive (kamma)
upanissaya—decisive support (con-
dition)
u papa j j a vedanly a—su bsequently ef-
acinna—habitual (kamma)
adlnava—danger
apatha—avenue (of sense)
apo—water
ayatana—base
ayu, ayuppamana—life-span
arammana—object
aruppa —immaterial (sphere or state)
alambana—object
aloka—light
avajjana—adverting
asanna—death-proximate (kamma)
asava—taint
asevana—repetition (condition)
ittha—desirable
itthamajjhatta—desirable-neutral
itthatta—femininity
idamsaccabhinivesa—dogmatic be-
lief that “This alone is the truth”
fective (kamma)
upapl}aka—obstructive (kamma)
upadana—clinging
upadarOpa—derivative matter
upadinnarupa—clung-to matter
upekkha—equanimity
uppada—(1) arising; (2) arising
(sub-moment)
ekaggata—one-pointedness
ogha—flood
oja—nutritive essence
ottappa—fear of wrongdoing
obhasa—aura
omaka—inferior (kamma)
olarikarupa—gross matter
katatta —reserve (kamma)
kappa—aeon
kabajlkara ahara—edible food
kamma—kamma, action, deed
kammannata —wieldiness
kammatthana —meditation subject
kammanimitta—sign of kamma
kammapatha—course of kamma
karuna—compassion
kalapa—group
kasina —kasina (meditation device)
kama—(1) sense (sphere), sensuous
(plane); (2) sensual (desire or
pleasure)
kamavacara—sense sphere
kaya—body (physical or mental)
kayavinnatti —bodily intimation
kala—time
kalavimutta—independent of time
kicca—function
kiriya, kriya—functional
kilesa—defilement
kukkucca—worry
ku sala—wholesome
khana—moment; sub-moment
khandha—aggregate
cittuppada—consciousness, act or
state of consciousness
cuti—death
cetana—volition
cetasika—mental factor
chanda—desire (to do or to attain)
janaka—productive (kamma)
jarata—decay
jaramarana—decay-and-death
javana—javana (i.e. active phase of
cognitive process)
jati—birth
jivha—tongue
jlvitarupa—material phenomenon of
life
jivitindriya—life faculty
jhana—jhana (i.e. meditative absorp-
tion)
jhananga—jhana factor
nana—knowledge
thana—(1) stage; (2) presence (sub-
moment)
gati—destiny
gatinimitta—sign of destiny
gantha—knot
gandha—smell
garuka—weighty (kamma)
gocara—object
gocaraggahika—taking objects
gocarariipa—objective matter
gotrabhO—change-of-lineage
ghana—nose
ghayana—smelling
cakkhu—eye
carita—temperament
citta—consciousness
cittavithi—cognitive process
cittasantana—stream of conscious-
ness
tanha—craving
tatramajjhattata—neutrality of mind
tadarammana—registration
tiracchanayoni—animal kingdom
tihetuka—triple rooted
tejo—fire
thlna—sloth
dasaka—decad
dassana— (1) seeing; (2) vision (as
knowledge)
dana—giving
ditthadhammavedanlya —immedi-
ately effective (kamma)
ditthi—view, wrong view
ditthigata_wrong view
dibbacakkhu—divine eye
dibbasota—divine ear
dukkha—(1) suffering; (2) pain,
painful (feeling)
deva—god
domanassa—displeasure
dosa —hatred
dvara—door
dvaravimutta—door-freed
dvipancavinnana—two sets of five-
fold sense consciousness
dhamma— (1) Dhamma (i.e. Bud-
dha's teaching); (2) phenomenon,
state; (3) mental object
dhammavicaya—investigation of
states (enlightenment factor)
dhatu—element
natthi —absence (condition)
navaka—nonad
nanakkhanika—asynchronous
(kamma condition)
nama— (1) mind, mental; (2) name
namapannatti—concept-as-name
namarupa—mind-and-matter
pakinnaka—(1) occasional (mental
factor); (2) miscellaneous
paggaha—exertion
paccaya—condition
paccayasatti—conditioning force
paccayuppannaconditionally arisen
paccavekkhana—reviewing
paccupatthana—manifestation
paccuppanna—present
pacchajata—postnascence (condition)
pancadvara—five sense doors
pancadvaravajjana—five-sense-door
adverting (consciousness)
pannatti—concept
panna—wisdom
pannindriya—wisdom faculty
patigha—(1) aversion; (2) (sensory)
impingement
paticcasamuppada—dependent aris-
ing
patipada—way
patibhaga—counterpart (sign)
oatisankha —reflective contemnlation
nikanti—attachment
nipphanna—concretely produced
(matter)
nibbana—Nibbana
nibbida—disenchantment
nimitta —sign
niyatayogl—fixed adjunct
niyama—procedure
niraya—hell
nirodha—cessation
nirodhasamapatti —attainment of
cessation
nissaya—support (condition)
nlvarana—hindrance
n'evasannanasannayatana—base of
neither-perception-nor-non-per-
ception
pakatOpanissaya—natural decisive
support (condition)
patisankha——reflective contemplation
patisandhi—rebirth-linking
patthana—conditional relations
pathavl—earth
padatthana—proximate cause
paracittavijanana—knowledge of
others’ minds
paramattha —ultimate reality
parikamma—preliminary
pariggaha—discernment
paricchedarupa —limiting material
phenomenon (i.e. space)
parinfia—full understanding
paritta—(1) limited (i.e. sense
sphere); (2) slight (object)
pavatta, pavatti—course of existence
pasadarupa—sensitive matter
passaddhi—tranquillity
pahana—abandoning
paka—resultant
pagunnata—proficiency
piti—zest
puggala—individual
punna—merit, meritorious
puthujjana—worldling
pubbenivasanussati—recollection of
past lives
puri satta —masculinity
purejata—prenascence (condition)
peta—peta (“hungry ghost”）
pettivisaya—sphere of petas
phala—fruit, fruition
phassa—contact
phusana—touching
photthabba—tangible (object)
bala—power
bahiddha—external
bahira—external
bojjhanga—factor of enlightenment
bodhipakkhiyadhamma—requisite of
enlightenment
bhanca—dissolution: dissolution
manodvaravajjana—mind-door
adverting (consciousness)
manodhatu—mind element
manovifinanadhatu—mind-con-
sciousness element
manosancetana—mental volition
marana—death
mahaggata—subli me
mahanta —great (object)
mahakiriya —great functional (con-
sciousness)
mahakusala —great wholesome (con
sciousness)
mahabhuta —great essential (matter)
mahavipaka —great resultant (con-
sciousness)
mana—conceit
manasa—consciousness
micchaditthi—wrong view
middha—torpor
muncitukamyata—desire for deliver
ance
mudita—appreciative joy
bhanga——dissolution; dissolution
(sub-moment)
bhaya—fear, fearful
bhava—existence
bhavanga—life-continuum
bhavana—meditation, development
(of the eightfold path, or of calm
and insight)
bhavarupa—sexual material phe-
nomena
bhutarupa—essential matter
bhumi—plane (of existence or of
consciousness)
magga—path
magganga—path factor
macchariya—avarice
manasi kara —attention
manussa—human being
mano—mind
manodvara—mind door
muduta—malleability
mula—root
metta—loving-kindness
mogha—futile (cognitive process)
momOha—sheer delusion
moha—delusion
yoga—bond
rasa—(1) function; (2) taste
raga—lust, attachment
rupa —(1) matter, material phenom-
enon; (2) fine-material (sphere or
plane); (3) visible form
rupakalapa—material group
rupavacara—fine-material sphere
lakkhana—characteristic
lakkhanarupa—characteristic of mat-
ter
lahuta—lightness
loka—world
lokiya—mundane
lokuttara —supramundane
lobha—greed
vac!—speech
vaclvinnatti—vocal intimation
vatta—round of existence
vanna—colour
vatthu—(1) base; (2) entity
vavatthana—analysis
vasita—mastery
vayama—effort
vikararupa—mutable matter
vigata—disappearance (condition)
vicara —sustained application
vicikiccha—doubt
vinnatti —intimation
vifinana—consciousness
vinnanancayatana—base of infinite
consciousness
vitakka—initial application
vlmamsa——investigation
vutthana—emergence
vedana—feeling
votthapana—determining
vohara—conventional expression
vyapada—ill will
sa-upadisesa —with residue remain-
ing (Nibbana element)
samyojana—fetter
sakadagamT—once-returner
sankappa—intention
sankhata—conditioned
sankhara_(1) formation; (2) mental
formation (4th aggregate); (3)
kammic formation; (4) prompting
sankhepa—group
sangaha—(1) compendium; (2) com-
bination, inclusion
sacca—truth
sacchikiriya—realization
sanna—perception
sati—mindfulness
vinibbhogarupa—separable material
phenomena
vipassana—insight
vipaka—result, resultant
vippayutta—dissociated from; disso-
ciation (condition)
vibhuta—clear (object)
vimokkha—emancipation
vimokkhamukha—door to emancipa-
tion
virati—abstinence
viriya—energy
visaya—object
visuddhi—purification
vlthi—process
vlthicitta—consciousness belonging
to a cognitive process
vlthimutta —process-freed (i.e. out-
side the cognitive process)
satipatthana—foundation of mind-
fulness
sadda—sound
saddha—faith
sanidassanarupa —visible matter
santati—continuity
santlrana—investigating (conscious-
ness), investigation
sandhi—connection
sappaccaya—with conditions
sappatigharOpa —impinging matter
sabhava —intrinsic nature
samatha—calm
samanantara—contiguity (condition)
samadhi—concentration
samapajjana—(act of) attainment
samapatti —(meditative) attainment
samutthana—origination; mode of
origin
samudaya—origin (as noble truth)
sampaticchana—receiving
sampayutta —associated with; asso-
ciation (condition)
sampayoga—association
sammappadhana—supreme effort
sammasana—comprehension
(knowledge)
samma-ajlva—right livelihood
sammakammanta—right action
sammaditthi —right view
sammavaca—right speech
sammavayama—right effort
sammasankappa_right intention
sammasati—right mindfulness
sammasamadhi_right concentration
sammuti—conventional (reality or
truth)
sajayatana—six sense bases
savana—hearing
sasankharika—prompted (conscious-
ness)
sadharana—universal, common
sayana—tasting
sasava —subject to taints
slla—virtue
sllabbataparamasa—adherence to
rites and ceremonies
sukha—happiness, pleasure, pleasant
(feeling)
sukhumarupa—subtle matter
sugati—blissful (plane)
sunnata—void
suddhavasa—Pure Abode
sekkha —trainee (i.e. three lower
grades of noble disciples)
sota—ear
sota—stream
sotapatti —stream-entry
sotapanna —stream-enterer
sobhana—beautiful
somanassa—joy
hadayavatthu—heart-base
hasana—smiling
sasankharika—prompted (conscious-
ness)
sahagata—accompanied by
sahajata—conascence (condition)
sahita—together with
sahetuka—rooted, with roots
hadayavatthu—heart-base
hasana—smiling
hasituppada—smile-producing (con-
sciousness)
hiri—shame
hetu—root


